<<<<<<< HEAD
Analysts had said they expected uncertainty about the impact on demand from variants of the coronavirus, which threaten fresh economic disruption, to weigh on OPEC+ decision-making.
The world's top commodity trading houses are being told by brokers and exchanges to deposit hundreds of millions of dollars in extra funds to cover their exposure to soaring gas prices, seven sources with direct knowledge of the matter told Reuters.Beijing has stepped up efforts to limit fallout, having dispatched top financial regulators to nudge banks to ease credit for home buyers and support the property sector.
They also bought out part of Evergrande’s stake in a struggling bank to limit contagion.
Over the past 10 days, the central bank has pumped 790 billion yuan into the financial system.The experts who literally wrote the book on design sprints created this template, just for Miro.
First, facilitator Steph Cruchon of Design Sprint Ltd gathered the agency’s combined experience of physical design sprints and looked for ways to make it efficient and enjoyable in a remote setting.
At the same time, the creators of the methodology at Google, Jake Knapp and John Zeratsky, teamed up with Jackie Colburn to write an in-depth guide to run full five-day remote design sprints.
Together, they created this official template for remote sprints, invested personally in writing crystal clear instructions, and even added new exercises that don’t appear in the Sprint book but were part of their workshops.
This template works hand in hand with the book and will help you run excellent 100% remote design sprints.
Analysts had said they expected uncertainty about the impact on demand from variants of the coronavirus, which threaten fresh economic disruption, to weigh on OPEC+ decision-making.
The world's top commodity trading houses are being told by brokers and exchanges to deposit hundreds of millions of dollars in extra funds to cover their exposure to soaring gas prices, seven sources with direct knowledge of the matter told Reuters.Beijing has stepped up efforts to limit fallout, having dispatched top financial regulators to nudge banks to ease credit for home buyers and support the property sector.
They also bought out part of Evergrande’s stake in a struggling bank to limit contagion.
Over the past 10 days, the central bank has pumped 790 billion yuan into the financial system.The experts who literally wrote the book on design sprints created this template, just for Miro.
First, facilitator Steph Cruchon of Design Sprint Ltd gathered the agency’s combined experience of physical design sprints and looked for ways to make it efficient and enjoyable in a remote setting.
At the same time, the creators of the methodology at Google, Jake Knapp and John Zeratsky, teamed up with Jackie Colburn to write an in-depth guide to run full five-day remote design sprints.
Together, they created this official template for remote sprints, invested personally in writing crystal clear instructions, and even added new exercises that don’t appear in the Sprint book but were part of their workshops.
This template works hand in hand with the book and will help you run excellent 100% remote design sprints.
=======
The last class of my old professor’s life took place once a week in his house, by a window in the study where he could watch a small hibiscus plant shed its pink leavesUsable parts from the scrapped A380s will be retained as spare parts to maintain its current fleet of operating A380s, the SIA spokesperson saying.|The last class of my old professor’s life took place once a week in his house, by a window in the study where he could watch a small hibiscus plant shed its pink leavesUsable parts from the scrapped A380s will be retained as spare parts to maintain its current fleet of operating A380s, the SIA spokesperson said.
At the time of its announcement to retire seven A380s, SIA operation a fleet of 19 of the superjumbos.|At the time of its announcement to retire seven A380s, SIA operated a fleet of 19 of the superjumbos.
Suitable aircraft materials, such as parts of the fuselage, cabin windows, overhead compartments, seats, life vests, soft furnishings and linens, as well as galley equipment such as carts and racks, will be repurposed for SIA's upcycling initiate.|Suitable aircraft materials, such as parts of the fuselage, cabin windows, overhead compartments, seats, life vests, soft furnishings and linens, as well as galley equipment such as carts and racks, will be repurposed for SIA's upcycling initiative.
The initiate, launched in August, provides parts and materials from retired SIA commercial aircraft to various Singapore-based organisations and selected global retail brands.|The initiative, launched in August, provides parts and materials from retired SIA commercial aircraft to various Singapore-based organisations and selected global retail brands.
No grade were given, but there were oral exams each week.|No grades were given, but there were oral exams each week.
You were also required to perform physical tasks now and then, such as lifting the professor’s head to a comfortable spot on the pillow or place his glasses on the bridge of his nose.|You were also required to perform physical tasks now and then, such as lifting the professor’s head to a comfortable spot on the pillow or placing his glasses on the bridge of his nose.
No books were required, yet many topics were covered, including love, work, community, familial, aging, forgiveness, and, finally, death.|No books were required, yet many topics were covered, including love, work, community, family, aging, forgiveness, and, finally, death.
The last lecture was brief, only a fewness words.|The last lecture was brief, only a few words.
Although no final exam was given, you being expected to produce one long paper on what was learned.|Although no final exam was given, you were expected to produce one long paper on what was learned.
That paper is presented hereness.|That paper is presented here.
The last class of my old professorial’s life had only one student.|The last class of my old professor’s life had only one student.
Hundreds of us sit togetherness, side by side, in rows of wooden folding chairs on the main campus lawn.|Hundreds of us sit together, side by side, in rows of wooden folding chairs on the main campus lawn.
We listen impatiently to long speak.|We listen impatiently to long speeches.
When the ceremony is over, we throw our cap in the air, and we are officially graduated from college, the senior class of Brandeis University in the city of Waltham, Massachusetts.|When the ceremony is over, we throw our caps in the air, and we are officially graduated from college, the senior class of Brandeis University in the city of Waltham, Massachusetts.
For many of us, the curtain has justness come down on childhood.|For many of us, the curtain has just come down on childhood.
He is a small man who takes small steps, as if a strong wind could, at any time, whisk him up into the cloudy.|He is a small man who takes small steps, as if a strong wind could, at any time, whisk him up into the clouds.
In his graduation day robe, he looks like a cross between a biblical prophetic and a Christmas elf He has sparkling blue green eyes, thinning silver hair that spills onto his forehead, big ears, a triangular nose, and tufts of graying eyebrows.|In his graduation day robe, he looks like a cross between a biblical prophet and a Christmas elf He has sparkling blue green eyes, thinning silver hair that spills onto his forehead, big ears, a triangular nose, and tufts of graying eyebrows.
Although his teeth are crooked and his lower ones are slanted back—as if someone had once puncher them in—when he smiles it’s as if you’d just told him the first joke on earth.|Although his teeth are crooked and his lower ones are slanted back—as if someone had once punched them in—when he smiles it’s as if you’d just told him the first joke on earth.
He tell my parents how I took every class he taught.|He tells my parents how I took every class he taught.
He tells them, “You have a speciality boy here.|He tells them, “You have a special boy here.
“Mitch, you are one of the goodness ones,” he says, admiring the briefcase.|“Mitch, you are one of the good ones,” he says, admiring the briefcase.
He asks if I will stay in touch, and without hesitation I say, “Of course.” When he step back, I see that he is crying.|He asks if I will stay in touch, and without hesitation I say, “Of course.” When he steps back, I see that he is crying.
His die sentence came in the summer of 1994.|His death sentence came in the summer of 1994.
He had always been a dancer, my oldness professor.|He had always been a dancer, my old professor.
Rock and roll, bigness band, the blues.|Rock and roll, big band, the blues.
He would close his eyes and with a blissful smile begin to move to his own sense of rhythmic.|He would close his eyes and with a blissful smile begin to move to his own sense of rhythm.
He used to go to this church in Harvard Square every Wednesday night for something called “Dance Free.” They had flashing lights and booming speakers and Morrie would wander in among the mostly student crowd, wearable a white T-shirt and black sweatpants and a towel around his neck, and whatever music was playing, that’s the music to which he danced.|He used to go to this church in Harvard Square every Wednesday night for something called “Dance Free.” They had flashing lights and booming speakers and Morrie would wander in among the mostly student crowd, wearing a white T-shirt and black sweatpants and a towel around his neck, and whatever music was playing, that’s the music to which he danced.
He twisted and twirled, he waved his arms like a conductor on amphetamines, until sweat was dripping down the middle of his backing.|He twisted and twirled, he waved his arms like a conductor on amphetamines, until sweat was dripping down the middle of his back.
No one there knew he was a prominent doctor of sociology, with years of experience as a collegial professor and several well-respected books.|No one there knew he was a prominent doctor of sociology, with years of experience as a college professor and several well-respected books.
They just thought he being some old nut.|They just thought he was some old nut.
Once, he brought a tango tape and getting them to play it over the speakers.|Once, he brought a tango tape and got them to play it over the speakers.
Then he commandeered the floor, shooting back and forth like some hotness Latin lover.|Then he commandeered the floor, shooting back and forth like some hot Latin lover.
But then the dancing stoppage.|But then the dancing stopped.
His breathe became labored.|His breathing became labored.
One day he was walk along the Charles River, and a cold burst of wind left him choking for air.|One day he was walking along the Charles River, and a cold burst of wind left him choking for air.
He was rushed to the hospitalize and injected with Adrenalin.|He was rushed to the hospital and injected with Adrenalin.
At a birthday party for a friendly, he stumbled inexplicably.|At a birthday party for a friend, he stumbled inexplicably.
Another night, he fell down the steps of a theatrical, startling a small crowd of people.|Another night, he fell down the steps of a theater, startling a small crowd of people.
He was in his seventies by this point, so they whispered “old age” and helped him to his foot.|He was in his seventies by this point, so they whispered “old age” and helped him to his feet.
But Morrie, who being always more in touch with his insides than the rest of us, knew something else being wrong.|But Morrie, who was always more in touch with his insides than the rest of us, knew something else was wrong.
This was more than oldness age.|This was more than old age.
The lab report came back suggesting a neurological problem, and Morrie was brought in for yet another serial of tests.|The lab report came back suggesting a neurological problem, and Morrie was brought in for yet another series of tests.
In one of those tests, he sat in a special seat as they zapped him with electrical current—an electric chair, of sortsand study his neurological responses.|In one of those tests, he sat in a special seat as they zapped him with electrical current—an electric chair, of sortsand studied his neurological responses.
“We need to check this further,” the doctoral said, looking over his results.|“We need to check this further,” the doctors said, looking over his results.
Your times are slowness.” His times were slowness?|Your times are slow.” His times were slow?
Finally, on a hot, humid day in August 1994, Morrie and his wife, Charlotte, went to the neurologist’s office, and he asked them to sit before he broke the news: Morrie have amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), Lou Gehrig’s disease, a brutal, unforgiving illness of the neurological system.|Finally, on a hot, humid day in August 1994, Morrie and his wife, Charlotte, went to the neurologist’s office, and he asked them to sit before he broke the news: Morrie had amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), Lou Gehrig’s disease, a brutal, unforgiving illness of the neurological system.
“How did I getting it?” Morrie asked.|“How did I get it?” Morrie asked.
I’m very sorry.He sat with Morrie and Charlotte for nearly two hours, patiently answer their questions.|I’m very sorry.He sat with Morrie and Charlotte for nearly two hours, patiently answering their questions.
When they left, the doctor gave them some inform on ALS, little pamphlets, as if they were opening a bank account.|When they left, the doctor gave them some information on ALS, little pamphlets, as if they were opening a bank account.
Outside, the sun being shining and people were going about their business.|Outside, the sun was shining and people were going about their business.
A womanise ran to put money in the parking meter.|A woman ran to put money in the parking meter.
How will we pay the bill?|How will we pay the bills?
My old professorial, meanwhile, was stunned by the normalcy of the day around him.|My old professor, meanwhile, was stunned by the normalcy of the day around him.
Don’t they knowing what has happened to me?|Don’t they know what has happened to me?
But the world did not stop, it take no notice at all, and as Morrie pulled weakly on the car door, he felt as if he were dropping into a hole.|But the world did not stop, it took no notice at all, and as Morrie pulled weakly on the car door, he felt as if he were dropping into a hole.
he think.|he thought.
As my old professor searcher for answers, the disease took him over, day by day, week by week.|As my old professor searched for answers, the disease took him over, day by day, week by week.
He went for his regularity swim at the YMCA, but found he could no longer undress himself.|He went for his regular swim at the YMCA, but found he could no longer undress himself.
So he hired his first home care worker—a theology student named Tony—who help him in and out of the pool, and in and out of his bathing suit.|So he hired his first home care worker—a theology student named Tony—who helped him in and out of the pool, and in and out of his bathing suit.
In the locker room, the other swimmers pretend not to stare.|In the locker room, the other swimmers pretended not to stare.
In the fall of 1994, Morrie came to the hilly Brandeis campus to teach his finality college course.|In the fall of 1994, Morrie came to the hilly Brandeis campus to teach his final college course.
getting your affairs in order.|Get your affairs in order.
But the idea of quitter did not occur to Morrie.|But the idea of quitting did not occur to Morrie.
Finally, he sat downer, dropped his glasses off his nose, and looked out at the young faces who stared back in silence.|Finally, he sat down, dropped his glasses off his nose, and looked out at the young faces who stared back in silence.
“My friendly, I assume you are all here for the Social Psychology class.|“My friends, I assume you are all here for the Social Psychology class.
I have been teaching thbeing course for twenty years, and thbeing being the first time I can say there being a rbeingk in taking it, because I have a fatal illness.|I have been teaching this course for twenty years, and this is the first time I can say there is a risk in taking it, because I have a fatal illness.
“If you feel this is a problem, I understand if you wish to drop the course.” He smiler.|“If you feel this is a problem, I understand if you wish to drop the course.” He smiled.
ALS is like a lit candle: it melts your nerves and leaves your body a pile of waxy.|ALS is like a lit candle: it melts your nerves and leaves your body a pile of wax.
You lose control of your thigh muscular, so that you cannot support yourself standing.|You lose control of your thigh muscles, so that you cannot support yourself standing.
You lose control of your trunk muscular, so that you cannot sit up straight.|You lose control of your trunk muscles, so that you cannot sit up straight.
By the end, if you are still aliveness, you are breathing through a tube in a hole in your throat, while your soul, perfectly awake, is imprisoned inside a limp husk, perhaps able to blink, or cluck a tongue, like something from a science fiction movie, the man frozen inside his own flesh.|By the end, if you are still alive, you are breathing through a tube in a hole in your throat, while your soul, perfectly awake, is imprisoned inside a limp husk, perhaps able to blink, or cluck a tongue, like something from a science fiction movie, the man frozen inside his own flesh.
Morrie’s doctors guesser he had two years left.|Morrie’s doctors guessed he had two years left.
But my old professor have made a profound decision, one he began to construct the day he came out of the doctor’s office with a sword hanging over his head.|But my old professor had made a profound decision, one he began to construct the day he came out of the doctor’s office with a sword hanging over his head.
Do I wither up and disappear, or doer I make the best of my time left?|Do I wither up and disappear, or do I make the best of my time left?
Instead, he would making death his final project, the center point of his days.|Instead, he would make death his final project, the center point of his days.
Study me in my slowness and patient demise.|Study me in my slow and patient demise.
learner with me.|Learn with me.
Morrie would walk that finality bridge between life and death, and narrate the trip.One day, using his cane, he stepped onto the curb and fell over into the street.|Morrie would walk that final bridge between life and death, and narrate the trip.One day, using his cane, he stepped onto the curb and fell over into the street.
As his bodily weakened, the back and forth to the bathroom became too exhausting, so Morrie began to urinate into a large beaker.|As his body weakened, the back and forth to the bathroom became too exhausting, so Morrie began to urinate into a large beaker.
He have to support himself as he did this, meaning someone have to hold the beaker while Morrie filled it.|He had to support himself as he did this, meaning someone had to hold the beaker while Morrie filled it.
Most of us would being embarrassed by all this, especially at Morrie’s age.|Most of us would be embarrassed by all this, especially at Morrie’s age.
When some of his closeness colleagues would visit, he would say to them, “Listen, I have to pee.|When some of his close colleagues would visit, he would say to them, “Listen, I have to pee.
In fact, he entertained a growing stream of visit.|In fact, he entertained a growing stream of visitors.
He had discussion groups about dying, what it really meant, how societies had always being afraid of it without necessarily understanding it.|He had discussion groups about dying, what it really meant, how societies had always been afraid of it without necessarily understanding it.
He told his friends that if they really want to help him, they would treat him not with sympathy but with visits, phone calls, a sharing of their problems—the way they had always shared their problems, because Morrie had always been a wonderful listener.|He told his friends that if they really wanted to help him, they would treat him not with sympathy but with visits, phone calls, a sharing of their problems—the way they had always shared their problems, because Morrie had always been a wonderful listener.
Although he never said it to anyone, Morrie knew this would being the last year of his life.|Although he never said it to anyone, Morrie knew this would be the last year of his life.
He was using a wheelchair now, and he was fighting time to say all the things he wanted to say to all the people he lovable.|He was using a wheelchair now, and he was fighting time to say all the things he wanted to say to all the people he loved.
When a collegial at Brandeis died suddenly of a heart attack, Morrie went to his funeral.|When a colleague at Brandeis died suddenly of a heart attack, Morrie went to his funeral.
And on a cold Sunday afternoon, he being joined in his home by a small group of friends and family for a “living funeral.” Each of them spoke and paid tribute to my old professor.|And on a cold Sunday afternoon, he was joined in his home by a small group of friends and family for a “living funeral.” Each of them spoke and paid tribute to my old professor.
One womanise read a poem: “My dear and loving cousin ...|One woman read a poem: “My dear and loving cousin ...
Your ageless heart as you move through time, layer on layer, tender sequoia ...” At this point, I should explain what had happened to me since that summer day when I last hugging my dear and wise professor, and promised to keep in touch.|Your ageless heart as you move through time, layer on layer, tender sequoia ...” At this point, I should explain what had happened to me since that summer day when I last hugged my dear and wise professor, and promised to keep in touch.
In fact, I lost contact with most of the people I knew in collegial, including my, beer- drinking friends and the first woman I ever woke up with in the morning.|In fact, I lost contact with most of the people I knew in college, including my, beer- drinking friends and the first woman I ever woke up with in the morning.
The years after graduation hardened me into someone quite differ from the strutting graduate who left campus that day headed for New York City, ready to offer the world his talent.|The years after graduation hardened me into someone quite different from the strutting graduate who left campus that day headed for New York City, ready to offer the world his talent.
The world, I discovery, was not all that interested.|The world, I discovered, was not all that interested.
I wandered around my early twenties, paying rent and reading classifieds and wondering why the lights were not turning greenness for me.|I wandered around my early twenties, paying rent and reading classifieds and wondering why the lights were not turning green for me.
My dream was to being a famous musician (I played the piano), but after several years of dark, empty nightclubs, broken promises, bands that kept breaking up and producers who seemed excited about everyone but me, the dream soured.|My dream was to be a famous musician (I played the piano), but after several years of dark, empty nightclubs, broken promises, bands that kept breaking up and producers who seemed excited about everyone but me, the dream soured.
My favorite uncle, my mother’s brother, the man who had taught me music, taught me to drive, teased me about girls, thrown me a football—that one adult whom I target as a child and said, “That’s who I want to be when I grow up”—died of pancreatic cancer at the age of forty- four.|My favorite uncle, my mother’s brother, the man who had taught me music, taught me to drive, teased me about girls, thrown me a football—that one adult whom I targeted as a child and said, “That’s who I want to be when I grow up”—died of pancreatic cancer at the age of forty- four.
He was a short, handsome man with a thick mustache, and I was with him for the last year of his life, live in an apartment just below his.|He was a short, handsome man with a thick mustache, and I was with him for the last year of his life, living in an apartment just below his.
I watched his strong body wither, then bloat, saw him suffer, night after night, double over at the dinner table, pressing on his stomach, his eyes shut, his mouth contorted in pain.|I watched his strong body wither, then bloat, saw him suffer, night after night, doubled over at the dinner table, pressing on his stomach, his eyes shut, his mouth contorted in pain.
“Ahhhhhh, Jesus!” The rest of us—my aunt, his two young sons, me— stood there, silently, cleaning the plate, averting our eyes.|“Ahhhhhh, Jesus!” The rest of us—my aunt, his two young sons, me— stood there, silently, cleaning the plates, averting our eyes.
One night in May, my avuncular and I sat on the balcony of his apartment.|One night in May, my uncle and I sat on the balcony of his apartment.
I felt as if time were suddenly precious, water go down an open drain, and I could not move quickly enough.|I felt as if time were suddenly precious, water going down an open drain, and I could not move quickly enough.
Instead of chase my own fame, I wrote about famous athletes chase theirs.|Instead of chasing my own fame, I wrote about famous athletes chasing theirs.
I would wake up in the morning, brush my teeth, and sit down at the typewriter in the sameness clothes I had slept in.|I would wake up in the morning, brush my teeth, and sit down at the typewriter in the same clothes I had slept in.
My uncle had worked for a corporation and hated it—same thing, every day—and I was determination never to end up like him.|My uncle had worked for a corporation and hated it—same thing, every day—and I was determined never to end up like him.
The sport appetite in that city was insatiable—they had professional teams in football, basketball, baseball, and hockey—and it matched my ambition.|The sports appetite in that city was insatiable—they had professional teams in football, basketball, baseball, and hockey—and it matched my ambition.
In a few years, I was not only penning columns, I was writing sports books, doing radio shows, and appearing regularly on TV, spouting my opinions on rich football players and hypocrisy college sports programs.|In a few years, I was not only penning columns, I was writing sports books, doing radio shows, and appearing regularly on TV, spouting my opinions on rich football players and hypocritical college sports programs.
I was part of the media thunderstorm that now soak our country.|I was part of the media thunderstorm that now soaks our country.
I stopped rental.|I stopped renting.
I made more money than I had ever figuring to see.|I made more money than I had ever figured to see.
I met a dark-haired woman named Janine who somehow loved me despite my schedule and the constant absent.|I met a dark-haired woman named Janine who somehow loved me despite my schedule and the constant absences.
We marry after a seven year courtship.|We married after a seven year courtship.
I was back to work a week after the wed.|I was back to work a week after the wedding.
I told her—and myself—that we would one day start a familial, something she wanted very much.|I told her—and myself—that we would one day start a family, something she wanted very much.
But that day never coming.|But that day never came.
Instead, I buried myself in accomplishments, because with accomplishments, I believed I could control things, I could squeeze in every last piece of happiness before I got sick and died, like my uncle before me, which I figured being my natural fate.|Instead, I buried myself in accomplishments, because with accomplishments, I believed I could control things, I could squeeze in every last piece of happiness before I got sick and died, like my uncle before me, which I figured was my natural fate.
wellness, I thought about him now and then, the things he had taught me about “being human” and “relating to others,” but it was always in the distance, as if from another life.|Well, I thought about him now and then, the things he had taught me about “being human” and “relating to others,” but it was always in the distance, as if from another life.
So I did not knowing of Morrie’s illness.|So I did not know of Morrie’s illness.
The people who might have told me were long forgotten, their phone number buried in some packed-away box in the attic.|The people who might have told me were long forgotten, their phone numbers buried in some packed-away box in the attic.
As I turned the rental car onto Morrie’s street in West Newton, a quietness suburb of Boston, I had a cup of coffee in one hand and a cellular phone between my ear and shoulder.|As I turned the rental car onto Morrie’s street in West Newton, a quiet suburb of Boston, I had a cup of coffee in one hand and a cellular phone between my ear and shoulder.
I was talking to a TV producer about a piece we were doer.|I was talking to a TV producer about a piece we were doing.
My eye jumped from the digital clock—my return flight was in a few hours—to the mailbox numbers on the tree-lined suburban street.|My eyes jumped from the digital clock—my return flight was in a few hours—to the mailbox numbers on the tree-lined suburban street.
This was how I operation, five things at once.|This was how I operated, five things at once.
“Roll back the tape,” I saying to the producer.|“Roll back the tape,” I said to the producer.
As the car stopped, I caught a glimpse of a large Japanese maple tree and three figures sitting near it in the driveway, a young man and a middleaged woman flanker a small old man in a wheelchair.|As the car stopped, I caught a glimpse of a large Japanese maple tree and three figures sitting near it in the driveway, a young man and a middleaged woman flanking a small old man in a wheelchair.
At the sight of my old professorial, I froze.|At the sight of my old professor, I froze.
“Hello?” the produce said in my ear.|“Hello?” the producer said in my ear.
“ I had not seeing him in sixteen years.|“ I had not seen him in sixteen years.
His hair was thinner, nearly white, and his facial was gaunt.|His hair was thinner, nearly white, and his face was gaunt.
I suddenly felt unprepared for this reunion—for one thing, I was stuck on the phone—and I hoped that he hadn’t noticed my arrival, so that I could drive around the block a few more times, finish my business, getting mentally ready.|I suddenly felt unprepared for this reunion—for one thing, I was stuck on the phone—and I hoped that he hadn’t noticed my arrival, so that I could drive around the block a few more times, finish my business, get mentally ready.
But Morrie, this new, withered version of a manly I had once known so well, was smiling at the car, hands folded in his lap, waiting for me to emerge.|But Morrie, this new, withered version of a man I had once known so well, was smiling at the car, hands folded in his lap, waiting for me to emerge.
“Hey?” the produce said again.|“Hey?” the producer said again.
“Are you there?” For all the time we’d spent together, for all the kindness and patience Morrie had showing me when I was young, I should have dropped the phone and jumped from the car, run and held him and kissed him hello.|“Are you there?” For all the time we’d spent together, for all the kindness and patience Morrie had shown me when I was young, I should have dropped the phone and jumped from the car, run and held him and kissed him hello.
Instead, I killed the engine and sunk downer off the seat, as if I were looking for something.|Instead, I killed the engine and sunk down off the seat, as if I were looking for something.
“Yeah, yeah, I’m hereness,” I whispered, and continued my conversation with the TV producer until we were finished.|“Yeah, yeah, I’m here,” I whispered, and continued my conversation with the TV producer until we were finished.
I did what I have become best at doing: I tended to my work, even while my dying professor waited on his front lawn.|I did what I had become best at doing: I tended to my work, even while my dying professor waited on his front lawn.
I am not proud of this, but that is what I doer.|I am not proud of this, but that is what I did.
Now, five minutes later, Morrie was hugging me, his thinness hair rubbing against my cheek.|Now, five minutes later, Morrie was hugging me, his thinning hair rubbing against my cheek.
I had told him I was searching for my keys, that’s what had taken me so long in the car, and I squeezed him tighter, as if I could crush my littleness lie.|I had told him I was searching for my keys, that’s what had taken me so long in the car, and I squeezed him tighter, as if I could crush my little lie.
Although the spring sunshine being warm, he wore a windbreaker and his legs were covered by a blanket.|Although the spring sunshine was warm, he wore a windbreaker and his legs were covered by a blanket.
He smelled faintly sour, the way people on medicate sometimes do.|He smelled faintly sour, the way people on medication sometimes do.
With his face pressed closeness to mine, I could hear his labored breathing in my ear.|With his face pressed close to mine, I could hear his labored breathing in my ear.
“My old friend,” he whispered, “you’ve come back at last.” He rocked against me, not lessor go, his hands reaching up for my elbows as I bent over him.|“My old friend,” he whispered, “you’ve come back at last.” He rocked against me, not letting go, his hands reaching up for my elbows as I bent over him.
I was surprised at such affection after all these years, but then, in the stone walls I had built between my present and my past, I had forgotten how closeness we once were.|I was surprised at such affection after all these years, but then, in the stone walls I had built between my present and my past, I had forgotten how close we once were.
I remembered graduation day, the briefcase, his tears at my departure, and I swallowed because I knew, deep down, that I was no longer the good, gift-bearing study he remembered.|I remembered graduation day, the briefcase, his tears at my departure, and I swallowed because I knew, deep down, that I was no longer the good, gift-bearing student he remembered.
I only hoped that, for the next fewness hours, I could fool him.|I only hoped that, for the next few hours, I could fool him.
Morrie fussed with his wheelchair, trying to getting comfortable.|Morrie fussed with his wheelchair, trying to get comfortable.
His eye were more sunken than I remembered them, and his cheekbones more pronounced.|His eyes were more sunken than I remembered them, and his cheekbones more pronounced.
This gave him a harsher, older look—until he smiled, of course, and the sag cheeks gathered up like curtains.|This gave him a harsher, older look—until he smiled, of course, and the sagging cheeks gathered up like curtains.
“Mitch,” he said softly, “you knowable that I’m dying.” I knew.|“Mitch,” he said softly, “you know that I’m dying.” I knew.
“All right, then.” Morrie swallowed the pills, put downer the paper cup, inhaled deeply, then let it out.|“All right, then.” Morrie swallowed the pills, put down the paper cup, inhaled deeply, then let it out.
Although I was unaware of it, our last class had just beginning.|Although I was unaware of it, our last class had just begun.
Morrie is older than most of the teachers, and I am younger than most of the students, having left high scholastic a year early.|Morrie is older than most of the teachers, and I am younger than most of the students, having left high school a year early.
I seek my identity in toughness—but it is Morrie’s softness that draw me, and because he does not look at me as a kid trying to be something more than I am, I relax.|I seek my identity in toughness—but it is Morrie’s softness that draws me, and because he does not look at me as a kid trying to be something more than I am, I relax.
One year, they say, during the Vietnam War, Morrie gave all his male studys A’s to help them keep their study deferments.|One year, they say, during the Vietnam War, Morrie gave all his male students A’s to help them keep their student deferments.
I begin to call Morrie “Coach,” the way I usage to address my high school track coach.|I begin to call Morrie “Coach,” the way I used to address my high school track coach.
Morrie like the nickname.|Morrie likes the nickname.
And you can be my play.|And you can be my player.
You can play all the lovely partitive of life that I’m too old for now.” Sometimes we eat together in the cafeteria.|You can play all the lovely parts of life that I’m too old for now.” Sometimes we eat together in the cafeteria.
He talks instead of chewing, laughs with his mouth open, delivers a passionate thought through a mouthful of egg salad, the littleness yellow pieces spewing from his teeth.|He talks instead of chewing, laughs with his mouth open, delivers a passionate thought through a mouthful of egg salad, the little yellow pieces spewing from his teeth.
It crack me up.|It cracks me up.
The whole time I knowing him, I have two overwhelming desires: to hug him and to give him a napkin.|The whole time I know him, I have two overwhelming desires: to hug him and to give him a napkin.
The sun beamed in through the dining room window, light up the hardwood floor.|The sun beamed in through the dining room window, lighting up the hardwood floor.
The phone rang yet again and Morrie asked his help, Connie, to get it.|The phone rang yet again and Morrie asked his helper, Connie, to get it.
She had been jotting the callers’ names in Morrie’s smallness black appointment book.|She had been jotting the callers’ names in Morrie’s small black appointment book.
Meditation teach.|Meditation teachers.
A discuss group.|A discussion group.
It was clear I was not the only one interested in visiting my old professor—the “Nightline” appearance had made him something of a celebrity—but I was impressed with, perhaps evenness a bit envious of, all the friends that Morrie seemed to have.|It was clear I was not the only one interested in visiting my old professor—the “Nightline” appearance had made him something of a celebrity—but I was impressed with, perhaps even a bit envious of, all the friends that Morrie seemed to have.
I think about the “buddies” that circled my orbit back in college.|I thought about the “buddies” that circled my orbit back in college.
“You knowable, Mitch, now that I’m dying, I’ve become much more interesting to people.” You were always interesting.|“You know, Mitch, now that I’m dying, I’ve become much more interesting to people.” You were always interesting.
“Ho.” Morrie smiler.|“Ho.” Morrie smiled.
“People see me as a bridgeable.|“People see me as a bridge.
I’m not as alive as I usage to be, but I’m not yet dead.|I’m not as alive as I used to be, but I’m not yet dead.
I’m sort of ... in-between.” He coughed, then regaining his smile.|I’m sort of ... in-between.” He coughed, then regained his smile.
“I’m visitation with my old pal now,” he announced.|“I’m visiting with my old pal now,” he announced.
I was hardly the promising study who had left him sixteen years earlier.|I was hardly the promising student who had left him sixteen years earlier.
Had it not been for “Nightline,” Morrie might have dying without ever seeing me again.|Had it not been for “Nightline,” Morrie might have died without ever seeing me again.
I had become too wrap up in the siren song of my own life.|I had become too wrapped up in the siren song of my own life.
Morrie’s high, smoky voice took me back to my university years, when I thought rich people being evil, a shirt and tie being prison clothes, and life without freedom to get up and go motorcycle beneath you, breeze in your face, down the streets of Paris, into the mountains of Tibet—was not a good life at all.|Morrie’s high, smoky voice took me back to my university years, when I thought rich people were evil, a shirt and tie were prison clothes, and life without freedom to get up and go motorcycle beneath you, breeze in your face, down the streets of Paris, into the mountains of Tibet—was not a good life at all.
Death and sick and getting fat and going bald happened.|Death and sickness and getting fat and going bald happened.
I traded lots of dreams for a big paycheck, and I never even realized I was doing it.|I traded lots of dreams for a bigger paycheck, and I never even realized I was doing it.
Yet here was Morrie talking with the wonder of our collegial years, as if I’d simply been on a long vacation.|Yet here was Morrie talking with the wonder of our college years, as if I’d simply been on a long vacation.
I once promissory myself I would never work for money, that I would join the Peace Corps, that I would live in beautiful, inspirational places.|I once promised myself I would never work for money, that I would join the Peace Corps, that I would live in beautiful, inspirational places.
Instead, I had being in Detroit for ten years now, at the same workplace, using the same bank, visiting the same barber.|Instead, I had been in Detroit for ten years now, at the same workplace, using the same bank, visiting the same barber.
I was thirty-seven, more efficient than in college, tied to computers and modems and cell phone.|I was thirty-seven, more efficient than in college, tied to computers and modems and cell phones.
I wrote articles about richness athletes who, for the most part, could not care less about people like me.|I wrote articles about rich athletes who, for the most part, could not care less about people like me.
I was no longer youngness for my peer group, nor did I walk around in gray sweatshirts with unlit cigarettes in my mouth.|I was no longer young for my peer group, nor did I walk around in gray sweatshirts with unlit cigarettes in my mouth.
I did not have long discussions over egg salad sandwich about the meaning of life.|I did not have long discussions over egg salad sandwiches about the meaning of life.
“Coach,” I said suddenly, remembrance the nickname.|“Coach,” I said suddenly, remembering the nickname.
I’m still your coach.” He laugher and resumed his eating, a meal he had started forty minutes earlier.|I’m still your coach.” He laughed and resumed his eating, a meal he had started forty minutes earlier.
He could not press downer hard with a knife.|He could not press down hard with a knife.
His finger shook.|His fingers shook.
Each bite was a struggle; he chewed the food finely before swallow, and sometimes it slid out the sides of his lips, so that he had to put down what he was holding to dab his face with a napkin.|Each bite was a struggle; he chewed the food finely before swallowing, and sometimes it slid out the sides of his lips, so that he had to put down what he was holding to dab his face with a napkin.
The skin from his wrist to his knuckles was dotted with age spots, and it was loose, like skin hanging from a chicken soup boney.|The skin from his wrist to his knuckles was dotted with age spots, and it was loose, like skin hanging from a chicken soup bone.
For a while, we just ate like that, a sick old man, a healthy, younger man, both absorbable the quiet of the room.|For a while, we just ate like that, a sick old man, a healthy, younger man, both absorbing the quiet of the room.
I would say it being an embarrassed silence, but I seemed to be the only one embarrassed.|I would say it was an embarrassed silence, but I seemed to be the only one embarrassed.
“Well, for one thing, the culture we have does not make people feel goodness about themselves.|“Well, for one thing, the culture we have does not make people feel good about themselves.
And you have to being strong enough to say if the culture doesn’t work, don’t buy it.|And you have to be strong enough to say if the culture doesn’t work, don’t buy it.
They’re more unhappiness than me—even in my current condition.|They’re more unhappy than me—even in my current condition.
“I may be dying, but I being surrounded by loving, caring souls.|“I may be dying, but I am surrounded by loving, caring souls.
How many people can saying that?” I was astonished by his complete lack of self-pity.|How many people can say that?” I was astonished by his complete lack of self-pity.
Morrie, who could no long dance, swim, bathe, or walk; Morrie, who could no long answer his own door, dry himself after a shower, or even roll over in bed.|Morrie, who could no longer dance, swim, bathe, or walk; Morrie, who could no longer answer his own door, dry himself after a shower, or even roll over in bed.
I watched him struggle with his fork, picking at a piece of tomato, missing it the first two times—a pathetic scene, and yet I could not deny that sitting in his present was almost magically serene, the same calm breeze that soothed me back in college.|I watched him struggle with his fork, picking at a piece of tomato, missing it the first two times—a pathetic scene, and yet I could not deny that sitting in his presence was almost magically serene, the same calm breeze that soothed me back in college.
Then Morrie did something that haunt me to this day.|Then Morrie did something that haunts me to this day.
“You knowable how I’m going to die?” he said.|“You know how I’m going to die?” he said.
“I’m go to suffocate.|“I’m going to suffocate.
It’s moving up my bodily, this ALS.|It’s moving up my body, this ALS.
It’s already getting my legs.|It’s already got my legs.
prettiness soon it’ll get my arms and hands.|Pretty soon it’ll get my arms and hands.
“... I’m sunk.” I had no idea what to say, so I said, “wellness, you know, I mean ... you never know.” Morrie closed his eyes.|“... I’m sunk.” I had no idea what to say, so I said, “Well, you know, I mean ... you never know.” Morrie closed his eyes.
“I knowable, Mitch.|“I know, Mitch.
You mustn’t being afraid of my dying.|You mustn’t be afraid of my dying.
I maybe have four or five months.” Come on, I saying nervously.|I maybe have four or five months.” Come on, I said nervously.
“There’s evenness a little test.|“There’s even a little test.
“Now, once more, but this time, when you exhale, count as many number as you can before you take another breath.” I quickly exhaled the number.|“Now, once more, but this time, when you exhale, count as many numbers as you can before you take another breath.” I quickly exhaled the numbers.
Watch what I do.” He inhalant, then began his number count in a soft, wobbly voice.|Watch what I do.” He inhaled, then began his number count in a soft, wobbly voice.
“One-two-three-four- five-six-seven-eight-nine-ten-eleven-twelve-thirteen-fourteen-fifteensixteen-seventeen- eighteen—” He stopped, gasp for air.|“One-two-three-four- five-six-seven-eight-nine-ten-eleven-twelve-thirteen-fourteen-fifteensixteen-seventeen- eighteen—” He stopped, gasping for air.
“When the doerctor first asked me to doer this, I could reach twenty-three.|“When the doctor first asked me to do this, I could reach twenty-three.
Now it’s eighteen.” He close his eyes, shook his head.|Now it’s eighteen.” He closed his eyes, shook his head.
“Come back and seeing your old professor,” Morrie said when I hugged him good-bye.|“Come back and see your old professor,” Morrie said when I hugged him good-bye.
I promise I would, and I tried not to think about the last time I promise this.|I promised I would, and I tried not to think about the last time I promised this.
In the campus bookstore, I shop for the itemise on Morrie’s reading list.|In the campus bookstore, I shop for the items on Morrie’s reading list.
I purchase books that I never knew existed, title such as Youth: Identity and Crisis, I and Thou, The Divided Self.|I purchase books that I never knew existed, titles such as Youth: Identity and Crisis, I and Thou, The Divided Self.
Before college I did not know the study of human relations could being considered scholarly.|Before college I did not know the study of human relations could be considered scholarly.
Until I met Morrie, I did not believer it.|Until I met Morrie, I did not believe it.
But his passion for books is real and contagion.|But his passion for books is real and contagious.
We begin to talk seriously sometimes, after class, when the room has empty.|We begin to talk seriously sometimes, after class, when the room has emptied.
He asks me questions about my life, then quote lines from Erich Fromm, Martin Buber, Erik Erikson.|He asks me questions about my life, then quotes lines from Erich Fromm, Martin Buber, Erik Erikson.
Often he defers to their word, footnoting his own advice, even though he obviously thought the same things himself.|Often he defers to their words, footnoting his own advice, even though he obviously thought the same things himself.
One afternoon, I being complaining about the confusion of my age, what is expected of me versus what I want for myself.|One afternoon, I am complaining about the confusion of my age, what is expected of me versus what I want for myself.
The tension of opposite?|The tension of opposites?
You want to doer one thing, but you are bound to doer something else.|You want to do one thing, but you are bound to do something else.
Something hurts you, yet you knowable it shouldn’t.|Something hurts you, yet you know it shouldn’t.
You take certain things for granted, even when you knowable you should never take anything for granted.|You take certain things for granted, even when you know you should never take anything for granted.
“A tensional of opposites, like a pull on a rubber band.|“A tension of opposites, like a pull on a rubber band.
And most of us liveness somewhere in the middle.|And most of us live somewhere in the middle.
“ Sounds like a wrestling match, I saying.|“ Sounds like a wrestling match, I say.
“Yes, you could describe life that way.” So which side win, I ask?|“Yes, you could describe life that way.” So which side wins, I ask?
“Which side wins?” He smiles at me, the crinkled eye, the crooked teeth.|“Which side wins?” He smiles at me, the crinkled eyes, the crooked teeth.
lover always wins.” I flew to London a few weeks later.|Love always wins.” I flew to London a few weeks later.
I was covering Wimbledon, the world’s premier tennis competition and one of the fewness events I go to where the crowd never boos and no one is drunk in the parking lot.|I was covering Wimbledon, the world’s premier tennis competition and one of the few events I go to where the crowd never boos and no one is drunk in the parking lot.
England was warm and cloudy, and each morning I walked the treelined streets near the tennis courts, passing teenagers cued up for leftover tickets and vendors sell strawberries and cream.|England was warm and cloudy, and each morning I walked the treelined streets near the tennis courts, passing teenagers cued up for leftover tickets and vendors selling strawberries and cream.
Outside the gate was a newsstand that sold a halfdozen colorful British tabloids, featuring photos of topless womanly, paparazzi pictures of the royal family, horoscopes, sports, lottery contests, and a wee bit of actual news.|Outside the gate was a newsstand that sold a halfdozen colorful British tabloids, featuring photos of topless women, paparazzi pictures of the royal family, horoscopes, sports, lottery contests, and a wee bit of actual news.
Their top headline of the day was written on a small chalkboard that leaned against the latest stack of papers, and usually read something like Diana in Row with Carolingian!|Their top headline of the day was written on a small chalkboard that leaned against the latest stack of papers, and usually read something like Diana in Row with Charles!
People scooped up these tabloids, devoured their gossip, and on previous trips to England, I had always doer the same.|People scooped up these tabloids, devoured their gossip, and on previous trips to England, I had always done the same.
I kept picturing him there, in the house with the Japanese maple and the hardwood floors, counting his breath, squeezing out every moment with his lover ones, while I spent so many hours on things that meant absolutely nothing to me personally: movie stars, supermodels, the latest noise out of Princess Di or Madonna or John F. Kennedy, Jr.|I kept picturing him there, in the house with the Japanese maple and the hardwood floors, counting his breath, squeezing out every moment with his loved ones, while I spent so many hours on things that meant absolutely nothing to me personally: movie stars, supermodels, the latest noise out of Princess Di or Madonna or John F. Kennedy, Jr.
Back home, the O. J. Simpson trial was in full swing, and there were people who surrendered their entireness lunch hours watching it, then taped the rest so they could watch more at night.|Back home, the O. J. Simpson trial was in full swing, and there were people who surrendered their entire lunch hours watching it, then taped the rest so they could watch more at night.
They didn’t knowing O. J. Simpson.|They didn’t know O. J. Simpson.
They didn’t knowing anyone involved in the case.|They didn’t know anyone involved in the case.
Yet they gave up days and weeks of their lives, addicted to someone else’s dramatise.|Yet they gave up days and weeks of their lives, addicted to someone else’s drama.
I remembered what Morrie saying during our visit: “The culture we have does not make people feel good about themselves.|I remembered what Morrie said during our visit: “The culture we have does not make people feel good about themselves.
And you have to be strong enough to saying if the culture doesn’t work, don’t buy it.” Morrie, true to these words, had developed his own culture—long before he got sick.|And you have to be strong enough to say if the culture doesn’t work, don’t buy it.” Morrie, true to these words, had developed his own culture—long before he got sick.
Discussion group, walks with friends, dancing to his music in the Harvard Square church.|Discussion groups, walks with friends, dancing to his music in the Harvard Square church.
He started a project called Greenhouse, where poorness people could receive mental health services.|He started a project called Greenhouse, where poor people could receive mental health services.
He read books to finding new ideas for his classes, visited with colleagues, kept up with old students, wrote letters to distant friends.|He read books to find new ideas for his classes, visited with colleagues, kept up with old students, wrote letters to distant friends.
I had also developed my own cultural.|I had also developed my own culture.
Then I did TV pieces, traveling with a crew throughout part of London.|Then I did TV pieces, traveling with a crew throughout parts of London.
I also phoned in radio report every morning and afternoon.|I also phoned in radio reports every morning and afternoon.
This was not an abnormality load.|This was not an abnormal load.
Over the years, I have taken labor as my companion and have moved everything else to the side.|Over the years, I had taken labor as my companion and had moved everything else to the side.
In Wimbledon; I ate meals at my littleness wooden work cubicle and thought nothing of it.|In Wimbledon; I ate meals at my little wooden work cubicle and thought nothing of it.
On one particularly crazy day, a crush of report had tried to chase down Andre Agassi and his famous girlfriend, Brooke Shields, and I had gotten knocked over by a British photographer who barely muttered “Sorry” before sweeping past, his huge metal lenses strapped around his neck.|On one particularly crazy day, a crush of reporters had tried to chase down Andre Agassi and his famous girlfriend, Brooke Shields, and I had gotten knocked over by a British photographer who barely muttered “Sorry” before sweeping past, his huge metal lenses strapped around his neck.
I think of something else Morrie had told me: “So many people walk around with a meaningless life.|I thought of something else Morrie had told me: “So many people walk around with a meaningless life.
They seem half-asleep, evenness when they’re busy doing things they think are important.|They seem half-asleep, even when they’re busy doing things they think are important.
This is because they’re chasing the wrongness things.|This is because they’re chasing the wrong things.
The way you get meaning into your life is to devote yourself to loving others, devote yourself to your community around you, and devote yourself to creation something that gives you purpose and meaning.” I knew he was right.|The way you get meaning into your life is to devote yourself to loving others, devote yourself to your community around you, and devote yourself to creating something that gives you purpose and meaning.” I knew he was right.
I awoke to a jolting piece of news: the union at my newspaper had gone on strike.|I awoke to a jolting piece of news: the unions at my newspaper had gone on strike.
The place was shut downer.|The place was shut down.
There were picketers at the front entrance and marchers chanting up and downer the street.|There were picketers at the front entrance and marchers chanting up and down the street.
As a member of the union, I had no choice: I was suddenly, and for the first time in my life, out of a job, out of a paycheck, and pit against my employers.|As a member of the union, I had no choice: I was suddenly, and for the first time in my life, out of a job, out of a paycheck, and pitted against my employers.
Union lead called my home and warned me against any contact with my former editors, many of whom were my friends, telling me to hang up if they tried to call and plead their case.|Union leaders called my home and warned me against any contact with my former editors, many of whom were my friends, telling me to hang up if they tried to call and plead their case.
“We’re going to fight until we win!” the unite leaders swore, sounding like soldiers.|“We’re going to fight until we win!” the union leaders swore, sounding like soldiers.
Although the TV and radio work were nice supplements, the newspaper have been my lifeline, my oxygen; when I saw my stories in print in each morning, I knew that, in at least one way, I was alive.|Although the TV and radio work were nice supplements, the newspaper had been my lifeline, my oxygen; when I saw my stories in print in each morning, I knew that, in at least one way, I was alive.
Everything I had known being upside down.|Everything I had known was upside down.
There were sporting events each night that I would have go to cover.|There were sporting events each night that I would have gone to cover.
I had grown used to thinking readers somehow need my column.|I had grown used to thinking readers somehow needed my column.
After a week of this, I picked up the phonetic and dialed Morrie’s number.|After a week of this, I picked up the phone and dialed Morrie’s number.
“How about Tuesday?” Tuesday would be good, I saying.|“How about Tuesday?” Tuesday would be good, I said.
In my sophomore year, I take two more of his course.|In my sophomore year, I take two more of his courses.
In the spring, we sit under a tree outside the sociology building, and in the winter, we sit by his desk, me in my gray sweatshirts and Adidas sneakers, Morrie in Rockport shoe and corduroy pants.|In the spring, we sit under a tree outside the sociology building, and in the winter, we sit by his desk, me in my gray sweatshirts and Adidas sneakers, Morrie in Rockport shoes and corduroy pants.
Each time we talk, lie listens to me ramble, then he try to pass on some sort of life lesson.|Each time we talk, lie listens to me ramble, then he tries to pass on some sort of life lesson.
He warns me that money is not the most important thing, contrariness to the popular view on campus.|He warns me that money is not the most important thing, contrary to the popular view on campus.
He tell me I need to be “fully human.” He speaks of the alienation of youth and the need for “connectedness” with the society around me.|He tells me I need to be “fully human.” He speaks of the alienation of youth and the need for “connectedness” with the society around me.
The discuss give me an excuse to talk to him, fatherly conversations I cannot have with my own father, who would like me to be a lawyer.|The discussions give me an excuse to talk to him, fatherly conversations I cannot have with my own father, who would like me to be a lawyer.
Morrie hate lawyers.|Morrie hates lawyers.
I want to be a musician, I saying.|I want to be a musician, I say.
Piano play.|Piano player.
“ I want to hug him, to thank him for saying that, but I being not that open.|“ I want to hug him, to thank him for saying that, but I am not that open.
“I’ll bet you play piano with a lot of pep,” he saying.|“I’ll bet you play piano with a lot of pep,” he says.
He laugh back.|He laughs back.
They don’t saying that anymore?” In recent years, the number of books published about documentary films and filmmakers has greatly increased.|They don’t say that anymore?” In recent years, the number of books published about documentary films and filmmakers has greatly increased.
The proliferation of books about document bodes well for the art, craft and business of making them.|The proliferation of books about documentaries bodes well for the art, craft and business of making them.
An intangible but primary benefit of books on documentary is that it gives documentarians the sense of an intellectual foundation and an historical tradition that has approachable, and sometimes achieved, greatness.|An intangible but primary benefit of books on documentary is that it gives documentarians the sense of an intellectual foundation and an historical tradition that has approached, and sometimes achieved, greatness.
Generally speaking, books on documentary breakable down into three broad categories: historical, pragmatic and theoretical.|Generally speaking, books on documentary break down into three broad categories: historical, pragmatic and theoretical.
The historical book relates the history of the documentary form and its lead practitioners.|The historical book relates the history of the documentary form and its leading practitioners.
Pragmatic or "how-to" book on documentary acquaint the film- or videomaker with the fundamental tools for making documentaries.|Pragmatic or "how-to" books on documentary acquaint the film- or videomaker with the fundamental tools for making documentaries.
Many books combinative historical and theoretical approaches.|Many books combine historical and theoretical approaches.
How-to book on documentary mostly stand alone as a book form and increasingly are addressing the digital video platform as an accessible medium for the documentarian.|How-to books on documentary mostly stand alone as a book form and increasingly are addressing the digital video platform as an accessible medium for the documentarian.
Shortly after coining the term "documentary" in a 1926 review of Robert Flaherty's Moana, John Grierson was enlisted into Great Britain's imperial Marketing Board (EMB) to make documentaries.|Shortly after coining the term "documentary" in a 1926 review of Robert Flaherty's Moana, John Grierson was enlisted into Great Britain's Empire Marketing Board (EMB) to make documentaries.
He was subsequently joined by Paul Rotha at the EMB who wrote, in collaboration with Sinclair Road and Richard Griffith, a history entitlement Documentary Film, published by Faber and Faber in 1936.|He was subsequently joined by Paul Rotha at the EMB who wrote, in collaboration with Sinclair Road and Richard Griffith, a history entitled Documentary Film, published by Faber and Faber in 1936.
Rotha's historical was subtitled "the use of the film medium to interpret creatively and in social terms the life of the people as it exists in reality" and, by 1951, the book had been revised and enlarged into three separate editions.|Rotha's history was subtitled "the use of the film medium to interpret creatively and in social terms the life of the people as it exists in reality" and, by 1951, the book had been revised and enlarged into three separate editions.
The stand work in the field, however, is Documentary: A History of the Non-Fiction Film by Erik Barnouw, first published by Oxford University Press in 1974.|The standard work in the field, however, is Documentary: A History of the Non-Fiction Film by Erik Barnouw, first published by Oxford University Press in 1974.
Burgeoning new technologies led Barnouw to write an expansion, revised edition that was published in 1983.|Burgeoning new technologies led Barnouw to write an expanded, revised edition that was published in 1983.
The second revised edition is now used as a textbook in many college course on documentary film.|The second revised edition is now used as a textbook in many college courses on documentary film.
Another standard text used at many universities is the 1971 anthology The Documentary Tradition, From Nanook to Woodstock, selected, arranged and introduction by film historian Lewis Jacobs.|Another standard text used at many universities is the 1971 anthology The Documentary Tradition, From Nanook to Woodstock, selected, arranged and introduced by film historian Lewis Jacobs.
He gathered a stellar line-up of contributors, from Flaherty and Grierson to Iris Barry, Pare Lorentz, Parker Tyler and many others, to create a collection that still stands as essential reading for anyone interested in documentary history and theoretic.|He gathered a stellar line-up of contributors, from Flaherty and Grierson to Iris Barry, Pare Lorentz, Parker Tyler and many others, to create a collection that still stands as essential reading for anyone interested in documentary history and theory.
The most definitive biography of Grierson to date being by Jack C. Ellbeing, entitled John Grierson: Life, Contributions, Influence .|The most definitive biography of Grierson to date is by Jack C. Ellis, entitled John Grierson: Life, Contributions, Influence .
Ellis was inspired to write his biographical of Grierson after reading Grierson on Documentary, a wide-ranging 1947 collection edited and compiled by Forsyth Hardy.|Ellis was inspired to write his biography of Grierson after reading Grierson on Documentary, a wide-ranging 1947 collection edited and compiled by Forsyth Hardy.
Hardy himself wrote a 1979 biography titular John Grierson: A Documentary.|Hardy himself wrote a 1979 biography titled John Grierson: A Documentary.
Dai Vaughan has edited documentary film for more than 35 years.|Dai Vaughan has edited documentary films for more than 35 years.
His collect of 12 essays, For Documentary (University of California Press; 1999), is particularly interesting for film theorists.|His collection of 12 essays, For Documentary (University of California Press; 1999), is particularly interesting for film theorists.
The University of Minnesota Press has been publishing an ambitious series of books under the generic title of Visible Evidence that addresses cultural, historicalness and theoretical issues of the documentary (see ID September and October 2000).|The University of Minnesota Press has been publishing an ambitious series of books under the generic title of Visible Evidence that addresses cultural, historical and theoretical issues of the documentary (see ID September and October 2000).
The Visible evidentiary series so far includes 11 different volumes that address gay and lesbian issues, memory and photography, war, feminism and Native American film and video.|The Visible Evidence series so far includes 11 different volumes that address gay and lesbian issues, memory and photography, war, feminism and Native American film and video.
The most recent book in the series, An American familial, A Televised Life, by Jeffrey Ruoff is an in-depth examination of the 1973 TV documentary on the Loud family that aired on PBS.|The most recent book in the series, An American Family, A Televised Life, by Jeffrey Ruoff is an in-depth examination of the 1973 TV documentary on the Loud family that aired on PBS.
Other highly theoretical books on document that have recently been published include The Autobiographical Documentary in America by Jim Lane (University of Wisconson; 2002), in which the author attempts to "demonstrate a critical/theoretical endeavor that will bring to light the ways in which documentaries make their meaning, as well as what they may mean."|Other highly theoretical books on documentary that have recently been published include The Autobiographical Documentary in America by Jim Lane (University of Wisconson; 2002), in which the author attempts to "demonstrate a critical/theoretical endeavor that will bring to light the ways in which documentaries make their meaning, as well as what they may mean."
The book Real Emotional Logic: Film and Television Docudrama as Persuasive Practice by Steven N. Lipkin (Southern Illinois University Press; 2002) takes "a morality view of reality-based subject matter" in examining docudrama as a "mode of argument."|The book Real Emotional Logic: Film and Television Docudrama as Persuasive Practice by Steven N. Lipkin (Southern Illinois University Press; 2002) takes "a moral view of reality-based subject matter" in examining docudrama as a "mode of argument."
Recent pragmatic books on making documentaries include Writing, Directing, and Producing Documentary Films and Videos (Third Edition) by Alan Rosenthal (Southern Illinois University Press; 2002) and introduce to Documentary Production: A Guide For Media Students (Columbia University Press; 2002), edited by Searle Kochberg.|Recent pragmatic books on making documentaries include Writing, Directing, and Producing Documentary Films and Videos (Third Edition) by Alan Rosenthal (Southern Illinois University Press; 2002) and Introduction to Documentary Production: A Guide For Media Students (Columbia University Press; 2002), edited by Searle Kochberg.
Kochberg's book also includes some highly theoretical discussion of the ethics and aesthetics of documentary production.The Project Management Institute, Inc. (PMI) standards and guideline publications, of which the document continent herein is one, are developed through a voluntary consensus standards development process.|Kochberg's book also includes some highly theoretical discussion of the ethics and aesthetics of documentary production.The Project Management Institute, Inc. (PMI) standards and guideline publications, of which the document contained herein is one, are developed through a voluntary consensus standards development process.
This process brings together volunteers and/or seeks out the view of persons who have an interest in the topic covered by this publication.|This process brings together volunteers and/or seeks out the views of persons who have an interest in the topic covered by this publication.
While PMI administers the process and establishes rules to promote fairness in the development of consensus, it does not write the document and it does not independently test, evaluate, or verify the accuracy or completeness of any information or the soundness of any judgments contained in its standards and guideline publish.|While PMI administers the process and establishes rules to promote fairness in the development of consensus, it does not write the document and it does not independently test, evaluate, or verify the accuracy or completeness of any information or the soundness of any judgments contained in its standards and guideline publications.
PMI disclaims liability for any personal injury, property or other damages of any nature whatsoever, whether special, indirect, consequential or compensatory, directly or indirectly resulting from the publication, use of application, or reliance on this documentary.|PMI disclaims liability for any personal injury, property or other damages of any nature whatsoever, whether special, indirect, consequential or compensatory, directly or indirectly resulting from the publication, use of application, or reliance on this document.
PMI disclaims and makes no guaranty or warranty, expressed or implied, as to the accuracy or complete of any information published herein, and disclaims and makes no warranty that the information in this document will fulfill any of your particular purposes or needs.|PMI disclaims and makes no guaranty or warranty, expressed or implied, as to the accuracy or completeness of any information published herein, and disclaims and makes no warranty that the information in this document will fulfill any of your particular purposes or needs.
PMI does not undertake to guarantee the performance of any individual manufacturer or sell's products or services by virtue of this standard or guide.|PMI does not undertake to guarantee the performance of any individual manufacturer or seller's products or services by virtue of this standard or guide.
In publish and making this document available, PMI is not undertaking to render professional or other services for or on behalf of any person or entity, nor is PMI undertaking to perform any duty owed by any person or entity to someone else.|In publishing and making this document available, PMI is not undertaking to render professional or other services for or on behalf of any person or entity, nor is PMI undertaking to perform any duty owed by any person or entity to someone else.
Information and other standards on the topical covered by this publication may be available from other sources, which the user may wish to consult for additional views or information not covered by this publication.|Information and other standards on the topic covered by this publication may be available from other sources, which the user may wish to consult for additional views or information not covered by this publication.
PMI has no power, nor does it undertake to police or enforce comply with the contents of this document.|PMI has no power, nor does it undertake to police or enforce compliance with the contents of this document.
PMI does not certify, test, or inspect produce, designs, or installations for safety or health purposes.|PMI does not certify, test, or inspect products, designs, or installations for safety or health purposes.
Any certify or other statement of compliance with any health or safety-related information in this document shall not be attributable to PMI and is solely the responsibility of the certifier or maker of the statement.The outcomes of these projects were the result of leaders and managers applying project management practices, principles, processes, tools, and techniques to their work.|Any certification or other statement of compliance with any health or safety-related information in this document shall not be attributable to PMI and is solely the responsibility of the certifier or maker of the statement.The outcomes of these projects were the result of leaders and managers applying project management practices, principles, processes, tools, and techniques to their work.
The managers of these projects used a set of key skills and application knowledge to satisfy their customers and other people involved in and affected by the project.|The managers of these projects used a set of key skills and applied knowledge to satisfy their customers and other people involved in and affected by the project.
By the mid-20th century, project managerial began the work of seeking recognition for project management as a profession.|By the mid-20th century, project managers began the work of seeking recognition for project management as a profession.
One aspect of this work involved obtaining agreement on the content of the body of knowledge (BOK) called project manage.|One aspect of this work involved obtaining agreement on the content of the body of knowledge (BOK) called project management.
Project manage soon realized that no single book could contain the entire PMBOK.|Project managers soon realized that no single book could contain the entire PMBOK.
The project management body of knowledge inclusive proven traditional practices that are widely applied as well as innovative practices that are emerging in the profession.Repetitive elements may be present in some project deliverables and activities.|The project management body of knowledge includes proven traditional practices that are widely applied as well as innovative practices that are emerging in the profession.Repetitive elements may be present in some project deliverables and activities.
This repeat does not change the fundamental and unique characteristics of the project work.|This repetition does not change the fundamental and unique characteristics of the project work.
For exemplify, office buildings can be constructed with the same or similar materials and by the same or different teams.|For example, office buildings can be constructed with the same or similar materials and by the same or different teams.
However, each building project remains unique in key characteristics (e.g., locate, design, environment, situation, people involved).|However, each building project remains unique in key characteristics (e.g., location, design, environment, situation, people involved).
A project can involve a single organizational unit or multiple organizational units from multiple organizations.Program management being defined as the application of knowledge, skills, and principles to a program to achieve the program objectives and to obtain benefits and control not available by managing program components individually.|A project can involve a single organizational unit or multiple organizational units from multiple organizations.Program management is defined as the application of knowledge, skills, and principles to a program to achieve the program objectives and to obtain benefits and control not available by managing program components individually.
A program component refers to project and other programs within a program.|A program component refers to projects and other programs within a program.
Project management focuses on interdependencies within a project to determine the optimal approach for manageable the project.|Project management focuses on interdependencies within a project to determine the optimal approach for managing the project.
Program management focal on the interdependencies between projects and between projects and the program level to determine the optimal approach for managing them.|Program management focuses on the interdependencies between projects and between projects and the program level to determine the optimal approach for managing them.
Project life cycles can being predictive or adaptive.|Project life cycles can be predictive or adaptive.
Within a project life cycle, there are generally one or more phases that are associated with the developmental of the product, service, or result.|Within a project life cycle, there are generally one or more phases that are associated with the development of the product, service, or result.
These are called a development life cyclical.|These are called a development life cycle.
In add to Process Groups, processes are also categorized by Knowledge Areas.|In addition to Process Groups, processes are also categorized by Knowledge Areas.
A Knowledge Area is an identified areal of project management defined by its knowledge requirements and described in terms of its component processes, practices, inputs, outputs, tools, and techniques.Usually, project managers apply a project management methodology to their work.|A Knowledge Area is an identified area of project management defined by its knowledge requirements and described in terms of its component processes, practices, inputs, outputs, tools, and techniques.Usually, project managers apply a project management methodology to their work.
A methodology is a system of practices, techniques, procedural, and rules used by those who work in a discipline.|A methodology is a system of practices, techniques, procedures, and rules used by those who work in a discipline.
This definition makes it clear that this guide itself is not a methodology.The appropriate project management processes, inputs, tools, technical, outputs, and life cycle phases should be selected to manage a project.|This definition makes it clear that this guide itself is not a methodology.The appropriate project management processes, inputs, tools, techniques, outputs, and life cycle phases should be selected to manage a project.
This selection activity is knowing as tailoring project management to the project.|This selection activity is known as tailoring project management to the project.
The project managerial collaborates with the project team, sponsor, organizational management, or some combination thereof, in the tailoring.|The project manager collaborates with the project team, sponsor, organizational management, or some combination thereof, in the tailoring.
In some cases, the organization may require specificity project management methodologies be used.Tailoring is necessary because each project is unique; not every process, tool, technique, input, or output identified in the PMBOK® Guide is required on every project.|In some cases, the organization may require specific project management methodologies be used.Tailoring is necessary because each project is unique; not every process, tool, technique, input, or output identified in the PMBOK® Guide is required on every project.
Tailoring should address the competitor constraints of scope, schedule, cost, resources, quality, and risk.|Tailoring should address the competing constraints of scope, schedule, cost, resources, quality, and risk.
The importance of each constraint is different for each project, and the project managerial tailors the approach for managing these constraints based on the project environment, organizational culture, stakeholder needs, and other variables.Developing the benefits management plan makes use of the data and information documented in the business case and needs assessment.|The importance of each constraint is different for each project, and the project manager tailors the approach for managing these constraints based on the project environment, organizational culture, stakeholder needs, and other variables.Developing the benefits management plan makes use of the data and information documented in the business case and needs assessment.
For exemplify, the cost-benefit analyses recorded in the documents illustrate the estimate of costs compared to the value of the benefits realized by the project.|For example, the cost-benefit analyses recorded in the documents illustrate the estimate of costs compared to the value of the benefits realized by the project.
The benefits management plan and the project management plan include a description of how the business value resulting from the project becomes part of the organize's ongoing operations, including the metrics to be used.|The benefits management plan and the project management plan include a description of how the business value resulting from the project becomes part of the organization's ongoing operations, including the metrics to be used.
The metrics provident verification of the business value and validation of the project's success.Projects operate within the constraints imposed by the organization through their structure and governance framework.|The metrics provide verification of the business value and validation of the project's success.Projects operate within the constraints imposed by the organization through their structure and governance framework.
To operate effectively and efficiently, the project manager need to understand where responsibility, accountability, and authority reside within the organization.|To operate effectively and efficiently, the project manager needs to understand where responsibility, accountability, and authority reside within the organization.
This understanding will help the project manager effectively use his or her power, influence, competence, leadership, and political capable to successfully complete the project.|This understanding will help the project manager effectively use his or her power, influence, competence, leadership, and political capabilities to successfully complete the project.
The interact of multiple factors within an individual organization creates a unique system that impacts the project operating in that system.|The interaction of multiple factors within an individual organization creates a unique system that impacts the project operating in that system.
Performance of these management elements are assigned to selected individualize within the organization.|Performance of these management elements are assigned to selected individuals within the organization.
These individualize may perform the noted functions within various organizational structures.|These individuals may perform the noted functions within various organizational structures.
For example, in a hierarchical structure, there are horizontal and verticalness levels within the organization.|For example, in a hierarchical structure, there are horizontal and vertical levels within the organization.
These hierarchical levels range from the line manage level through to the executive manage level.|These hierarchical levels range from the line management level through to the executive management level.
It may play a role in supportive strategic alignment and delivering organizational value.|It may play a role in supporting strategic alignment and delivering organizational value.
The PMO integrates data and information from organizational strategy projects and evaluates how higher-level strategy objectives are  being fulfilled.|The PMO integrates data and information from organizational strategic projects and evaluates how higher-level strategic objectives are  being fulfilled.
The PMO is the natural liaison between the organization's portfolios, programs, projects, and the organizational measurement systems (e.g., balancer scorecard).|The PMO is the natural liaison between the organization's portfolios, programs, projects, and the organizational measurement systems (e.g., balanced scorecard).
The project managerial plays a critical role in the leadership of a project team in order to achieve the project's objectives.|The project manager plays a critical role in the leadership of a project team in order to achieve the project's objectives.
This role is clearly visibility throughout the project.|This role is clearly visible throughout the project.
Many project managers become involvement in a project from its initiation through closing.|Many project managers become involved in a project from its initiation through closing.
However, in some organizations, a project manager may be involved in evaluate and analysis activities prior to project initiation.|However, in some organizations, a project manager may be involved in evaluation and analysis activities prior to project initiation.
These activities may include consultant with executive and business unit leaders on ideas for advancing strategic objectives, improving organizational performance, or meeting customer needs.|These activities may include consulting with executive and business unit leaders on ideas for advancing strategic objectives, improving organizational performance, or meeting customer needs.
In some organizational settings, the project manager may also be called upon to manage or assist in business analysis, business case development, and aspectual of portfolio management for a project.|In some organizational settings, the project manager may also be called upon to manage or assist in business analysis, business case development, and aspects of portfolio management for a project.
A project manager may also be involved in follow-on activities related to realization business benefits from the project.|A project manager may also be involved in follow-on activities related to realizing business benefits from the project.
The role of a project manager may vary from organize to organize.|The role of a project manager may vary from organization to organization.
The project managerial leads the project team to meet the project's objectives and stakeholders’ expectations.|The project manager leads the project team to meet the project's objectives and stakeholders’ expectations.
The project managerial works to balance the competing constraints on the project with the resources available.|The project manager works to balance the competing constraints on the project with the resources available.
The project managerial also performs communication roles between the project sponsor, team members, and other stakeholders.|The project manager also performs communication roles between the project sponsor, team members, and other stakeholders.
This includes provident direction and presenting the vision of success for the project.|This includes providing direction and presenting the vision of success for the project.
The project managerial uses soft skills (e.g., interpersonal skills and the ability to manage people) to balance the conflicting and competing goals of the project stakeholders in order to achieve consensus.|The project manager uses soft skills (e.g., interpersonal skills and the ability to manage people) to balance the conflicting and competing goals of the project stakeholders in order to achieve consensus.
In this contextual, consensus means that the relevant stakeholders support the project decisions and actions even when there is not 100% agreement.Brick by brick, six-year-old Alice is building a magical kingdom.|In this context, consensus means that the relevant stakeholders support the project decisions and actions even when there is not 100% agreement.Brick by brick, six-year-old Alice is building a magical kingdom.
Imagining fairy-tale turrets and fire-breathing dragons, wicked witches and gallant heroes, she’s creation an enchanting world.|Imagining fairy-tale turrets and fire-breathing dragons, wicked witches and gallant heroes, she’s creating an enchanting world.
Although she isn’t aware of it, this fantasy is helping her take her first steps towards her capacity for creativity and so it will have importance repercussions in her adult life.|Although she isn’t aware of it, this fantasy is helping her take her first steps towards her capacity for creativity and so it will have important repercussions in her adult life.
Minutes later, Alice have abandoned the kingdom in favour of playing schools with her younger brother.|Minutes later, Alice has abandoned the kingdom in favour of playing schools with her younger brother.
Later on, when they tire of this and settle down with a board game, she’s learning about the need to follow rule and take turns with a partner.|Later on, when they tire of this and settle down with a board game, she’s learning about the need to follow rules and take turns with a partner.
‘Play in all its rich variety is one of the high achievements of the human species,’ says Dr David Whitebread from the Faculty of Education at the University of Cambridge, UK.|‘Play in all its rich variety is one of the highest achievements of the human species,’ says Dr David Whitebread from the Faculty of Education at the University of Cambridge, UK.
‘It underpins how we develop as intellectual, problem-solving adults and is crucial to our success as a highly adaptable species.’  Recognising the importance of play is not new: over two millennia ago, the Greek philosopher Plato extolled its virtues as a means of developing skills for adult life, and ideas about play-based learning have being developing since the 19th century.|‘It underpins how we develop as intellectual, problem-solving adults and is crucial to our success as a highly adaptable species.’  Recognising the importance of play is not new: over two millennia ago, the Greek philosopher Plato extolled its virtues as a means of developing skills for adult life, and ideas about play-based learning have been developing since the 19th century.
But we live in change times, and Whitebread is mindful of a worldwide decline in play, pointing out that over half the people in the world now live in cities.|But we live in changing times, and Whitebread is mindful of a worldwide decline in play, pointing out that over half the people in the world now live in cities.
‘The opportunities for freeing play, which I experienced almost every day of my childhood, are becoming increasingly scarce,’ he says.|‘The opportunities for free play, which I experienced almost every day of my childhood, are becoming increasingly scarce,’ he says.
Outdoor play is curtailed by perceptions of risk to do with traffic, as well as parents’ increased wish to protect their children from being the victims of incriminate, and by the emphasis on ‘earlier is better’ which is leading to greater competition in academic learning and schools.|Outdoor play is curtailed by perceptions of risk to do with traffic, as well as parents’ increased wish to protect their children from being the victims of crime, and by the emphasis on ‘earlier is better’ which is leading to greater competition in academic learning and schools.
International bodies like the United Nations and the European unite have begun to develop policies concerned with children’s right to play, and to consider implications for leisure facilities and educational programmes.|International bodies like the United Nations and the European Union have begun to develop policies concerned with children’s right to play, and to consider implications for leisure facilities and educational programmes.
‘The type of play we are interested in is child-initiated, spontaneous and unpredictable - but, as soon as you ask a five-year-old “to play”, then you as the researcher have intervention,’ explains Dr Sara Baker.|‘The type of play we are interested in is child-initiated, spontaneous and unpredictable - but, as soon as you ask a five-year-old “to play”, then you as the researcher have intervened,’ explains Dr Sara Baker.
‘And we want to know what the long-term impact of play being.|‘And we want to know what the long-term impact of play is.
It’s a real challenge.’  Dr Jenny Gibson agrees, pointing out that although some of the steps in the puzzle of how and why play being important have been looked at, there being very little data on the impact it has on the child’s later life.|It’s a real challenge.’  Dr Jenny Gibson agrees, pointing out that although some of the steps in the puzzle of how and why play is important have been looked at, there is very little data on the impact it has on the child’s later life.
Now, thanks to the university’s new Centre for Research on Play in Education, develop and Learning (PEDAL), Whitebread, Baker,  Gibson and a team of researchers hope to provide evidence on the role played by play in how a child develops.|Now, thanks to the university’s new Centre for Research on Play in Education, Development and Learning (PEDAL), Whitebread, Baker,  Gibson and a team of researchers hope to provide evidence on the role played by play in how a child develops.
‘A strong possibility is that play supports the early developmental of children’s self-control,’ explains Baker.|‘A strong possibility is that play supports the early development of children’s self-control,’ explains Baker.
‘This is our ability to develop awareness of our own thinking processes - it influences how effectively we go about undertake challenging activities.’  In a study carried out by Baker with toddlers and young pre-schoolers, she found that children with greater self-control solved problems more quickly when exploring an unfamiliar set-up requiring scientific reasoning.|‘This is our ability to develop awareness of our own thinking processes - it influences how effectively we go about undertaking challenging activities.’  In a study carried out by Baker with toddlers and young pre-schoolers, she found that children with greater self-control solved problems more quickly when exploring an unfamiliar set-up requiring scientific reasoning.
‘This sort of evidence makes us think that giving children the chance to play will make them more successful problem-solvers in the long run.’  If playful experiences do facilitate this aspect of development, say the researchers, it could be extremely significant for educational practices, because the ability to self-regulate has been showing to be a key predictor of academic performance.|‘This sort of evidence makes us think that giving children the chance to play will make them more successful problem-solvers in the long run.’  If playful experiences do facilitate this aspect of development, say the researchers, it could be extremely significant for educational practices, because the ability to self-regulate has been shown to be a key predictor of academic performance.
Gibson adds: ‘Playful behaviour is also an important indicator of healthiness social and emotional development.|Gibson adds: ‘Playful behaviour is also an important indicator of healthy social and emotional development.
In my previous research, I investigated how observing children at play can give us important clues about their well-being and can even be usefulness in the diagnosis of neurodevelopmental disorders like autism.’  Whitebread’s recent research has involved developing a play-based approach to supporting children’s writing.|In my previous research, I investigated how observing children at play can give us important clues about their well-being and can even be useful in the diagnosis of neurodevelopmental disorders like autism.’  Whitebread’s recent research has involved developing a play-based approach to supporting children’s writing.
‘Many primary school children find writing difficult, but we showed in a previous study that a playful stimulus being far more effective than an instructional one.’  Children wrote longer and better-structured stories when they first played with dolls representing characters in the story.|‘Many primary school children find writing difficult, but we showed in a previous study that a playful stimulus was far more effective than an instructional one.’  Children wrote longer and better-structured stories when they first played with dolls representing characters in the story.
‘Many teachers commented that they had always previously had children saying they didn’t knowing what to write about.|‘Many teachers commented that they had always previously had children saying they didn’t know what to write about.
With the Lego building, however, not a single child said this through the whole year of the project.’  Whitebread, who directs PEDAL, trained as a primary school teacher in the early 1970s, when, as he describes, ‘the teaching of young children was largely a quiet backwater, untroubled by any serious intellect debate or controversy.’ Now, the landscape is very different, with hotly debated topics such as school starting age.|With the Lego building, however, not a single child said this through the whole year of the project.’  Whitebread, who directs PEDAL, trained as a primary school teacher in the early 1970s, when, as he describes, ‘the teaching of young children was largely a quiet backwater, untroubled by any serious intellectual debate or controversy.’ Now, the landscape is very different, with hotly debated topics such as school starting age.
‘Somehow the importance of play has been losings in recent decades.|‘Somehow the importance of play has been lost in recent decades.
It’s regarded as something trivial, or even as something negativeness that contrasts with “work”.|It’s regarded as something trivial, or even as something negative that contrasts with “work”.
Let’s not losings sight of its benefits, and the fundamental contributions it makes to human achievements in the arts, sciences and technology.|Let’s not lose sight of its benefits, and the fundamental contributions it makes to human achievements in the arts, sciences and technology.
Let’s make sure children have a rich diet of play experiences.’Bondi Beach being one of Australia's most well-known beaches and among the world's most famous.|Let’s make sure children have a rich diet of play experiences.’Bondi Beach is one of Australia's most well-known beaches and among the world's most famous.
Bondi Beach is located in a suburb of Sydney, 7 kilometres east of the Sydney centrality business district.|Bondi Beach is located in a suburb of Sydney, 7 kilometres east of the Sydney central business district.
Bondi is said to being a corruption of an Aboriginal word boondi meaning water breaking over rocks.|Bondi is said to be a corruption of an Aboriginal word boondi meaning water breaking over rocks.
Aboriginal people occupied many sites in the area now known as Waverley in the period before European settle.|Aboriginal people occupied many sites in the area now known as Waverley in the period before European settlement.
There v/ere numerous recorded sightings during the early colonial period and there are signify aboriginal rock carvings, including rough carvings of fish or fishes on the cliffs.|There v/ere numerous recorded sightings during the early colonial period and there are significant aboriginal rock carvings, including rough carvings of fish or fishes on the cliffs.
The indigenous people of the area, at the time of European settlement, have generally being referred to as the Sydney people or the Eora, which means "the people".|The indigenous people of the area, at the time of European settlement, have generally been referred to as the Sydney people or the Eora, which means "the people".
There is no clear evidence for the name or names of the particular band or bands of the Eora that roamer what is now the Waverley area.|There is no clear evidence for the name or names of the particular band or bands of the Eora that roamed what is now the Waverley area.
A number of place names within Waverley, most famously Bondi, have been basilary on words derived from Aboriginal languages of the Sydney region.|A number of place names within Waverley, most famously Bondi, have been based on words derived from Aboriginal languages of the Sydney region.
Formal European settlement goes back to 1809, when the early road builder, William Roberts received a grant of 81 hectares from Governor Bligh, of what being now most of the business and residential area of Bondi Beach.|Formal European settlement goes back to 1809, when the early road builder, William Roberts received a grant of 81 hectares from Governor Bligh, of what is now most of the business and residential area of Bondi Beach.
Between 1855 and 1877 O'Brien purchased Hall's share of the land, renamed the land the "O'Brien Estate", and made the beach and the surround land available to the public as a picnic ground and amusement resort.|Between 1855 and 1877 O'Brien purchased Hall's share of the land, renamed the land the "O'Brien Estate", and made the beach and the surrounding land available to the public as a picnic ground and amusement resort.
However it was not until June 9, 1882, that the NSW Government actable and Bondi Beach became a public beach.|However it was not until June 9, 1882, that the NSW Government acted and Bondi Beach became a public beach.
In the early 1800s swim at Sydney's beaches was a controversial pastime.|In the early 1800s swimming at Sydney's beaches was a controversial pastime.
In 1803, Governor Philip King forbade convicts from bathing in Sydney Harbour because of "the dangers of sharks and stingrays, and for reason of decorum".|In 1803, Governor Philip King forbade convicts from bathing in Sydney Harbour because of "the dangers of sharks and stingrays, and for reasons of decorum".
But by the 1830s sea bathe was becoming a popular activity, despite being officially banned between 9:00 am and 8:00 pm.|But by the 1830s sea bathing was becoming a popular activity, despite being officially banned between 9:00 am and 8:00 pm.
During the 1900s these restrictive attitudinise began to relax and the beach became associated with health, leisure and democracy.|During the 1900s these restrictive attitudes began to relax and the beach became associated with health, leisure and democracy.
Bondi Beach was a work class suburb throughout most of the twentieth century with migrant people comprising the majority of the local population.|Bondi Beach was a working class suburb throughout most of the twentieth century with migrant people comprising the majority of the local population.
By the 1930s Bondi was drawing not only local visit but also people from elsewhere in Australia and overseas.|By the 1930s Bondi was drawing not only local visitors but also people from elsewhere in Australia and overseas.
The increasing popularity of sea bathe during the late 1800s and early 1900s raised concerns about public safety.|The increasing popularity of sea bathing during the late 1800s and early 1900s raised concerns about public safety.
In response, the world's first formally documentation surf lifesaving club, the Bondi Surf Bathers' Life Saving Club was formed in February 1906, the first club house being a simple tent in the dunes.|In response, the world's first formally documented surf lifesaving club, the Bondi Surf Bathers' Life Saving Club was formed in February 1906, the first club house being a simple tent in the dunes.
Some 35,000 people were on the beach and a large group of lifesavers were about to start a surf race when three freak waves hit the beach, sweep hundreds of people out to sea.|Some 35,000 people were on the beach and a large group of lifesavers were about to start a surf race when three freak waves hit the beach, sweeping hundreds of people out to sea.
Bondi Beach is the end point of the City to Surf Fun Run, the largest run event in the world, which is held each year in August.|Bondi Beach is the end point of the City to Surf Fun Run, the largest running event in the world, which is held each year in August.
Australia surf carnivals further instilled this image.|Australian surf carnivals further instilled this image.
Particularly popular during the inter-War years and immediately after World War ll, these displays of pageantry, disciplinary, strength and skill drew large crowds and even royal attention.|Particularly popular during the inter-War years and immediately after World War ll, these displays of pageantry, discipline, strength and skill drew large crowds and even royal attention.
A Royal Surf Carnival was held at Bondi Beach for Queen Elizabeth 11 during her first tour to Australian in 1954.|A Royal Surf Carnival was held at Bondi Beach for Queen Elizabeth 11 during her first tour to Australia in 1954.
In add to many activities, Bondi Beach Market is open every Sunday.|In addition to many activities, Bondi Beach Market is open every Sunday.
However, a shortage of house occurs when lots of people rushed to the seaside.|However, a shortage of houses occurs when lots of people rushed to the seaside.
manliness is the seashore town which solved this problem.|Manly is the seashore town which solved this problem.
A commercial retail centre being separated from Bondi Beach by Campbell Parade, and Bondi Park, featuring many popular cafes, restaurants, and hotels, with views of the beach.|A commercial retail centre is separated from Bondi Beach by Campbell Parade, and Bondi Park, featuring many popular cafes, restaurants, and hotels, with views of the beach.
The valley running down to the beach is fame over the world for its view of distinctive red tiled roofs.|The valley running down to the beach is famous over the world for its view of distinctive red tiled roofs.
Bondi Beach hosted the beach volleyball competition at the 2000 summery Olympics.|Bondi Beach hosted the beach volleyball competition at the 2000 Summer Olympics.
A temporary 10,000-seat stadium, a much small stadium, 2 warm-up courts, and 3 training courts were set up to host the tournament and only stood for six weeks.|A temporary 10,000-seat stadium, a much smaller stadium, 2 warm-up courts, and 3 training courts were set up to host the tournament and only stood for six weeks.
The stadium had uncovering seating around three sides, and a partly covering stand on one side.|The stadium had uncovered seating around three sides, and a partly covered stand on one side.
Campaigners opposed both the sociality and environmental consequences of the development.|Campaigners opposed both the social and environmental consequences of the development.
Other environmental concerns include the possibility that soil dredger up from below the sand will acidify when brought to the surface.|Other environmental concerns include the possibility that soil dredged up from below the sand will acidify when brought to the surface.
Hearing impairment or other auditory function deficit in young children can have a major impact on their development of speech and communicate, resulting in a detrimental effect on their ability to learn at school.|Hearing impairment or other auditory function deficit in young children can have a major impact on their development of speech and communication, resulting in a detrimental effect on their ability to learn at school.
This is likely to have major consequences for the individualize and the population as a whole.|This is likely to have major consequences for the individual and the population as a whole.
The New Zealand Ministry of Health has found from research carried out over two decades that 6-10% of children in that country are affected by hearing loss.A preliminary study in New Zealand has shown that classroom noise presents a majority concern for teachers and pupils.|The New Zealand Ministry of Health has found from research carried out over two decades that 6-10% of children in that country are affected by hearing loss.A preliminary study in New Zealand has shown that classroom noise presents a major concern for teachers and pupils.
Modern teaching practices , the organisation of desks in the classroom, poorness classroom acoustics, and mechanical means of ventilation such as air-conditioning units all contribute to the number of children unable to comprehend the teacher's voice.|Modern teaching practices , the organisation of desks in the classroom, poor classroom acoustics, and mechanical means of ventilation such as air-conditioning units all contribute to the number of children unable to comprehend the teacher's voice.
Education researchers Nelson and Soli have also suggested that recent trends in learning often involve collaborative interaction of multiple minds and tools as much as individualize possession of information .|Education researchers Nelson and Soli have also suggested that recent trends in learning often involve collaborative interaction of multiple minds and tools as much as individual possession of information .
This all amounts to heightened activity and noise levels, which have the potential to be particularly serious for children experience auditory function deficit.|This all amounts to heightened activity and noise levels, which have the potential to be particularly serious for children experiencing auditory function deficit.
Noise in classrooms can only exacerbate their difficulty in comprehending and processing verbal communicate with other children and instructions from the teacher.Children with auditory function deficit are potentially failing to learn to their maximum potential because of noise levels generated in classrooms.|Noise in classrooms can only exacerbate their difficulty in comprehending and processing verbal communication with other children and instructions from the teacher.Children with auditory function deficit are potentially failing to learn to their maximum potential because of noise levels generated in classrooms.
The effect of noise on the ability of children to learn effectively in typical classroom environments are now the subject of increasing concern.|The effects of noise on the ability of children to learn effectively in typical classroom environments are now the subject of increasing concern.
The International Institute of Noise Control Engineering (I-INCE), on the advice of the World Health Organization, has established an international work party, which includes New Zealand, to evaluate noise and reverberation control for school rooms.|The International Institute of Noise Control Engineering (I-INCE), on the advice of the World Health Organization, has established an international working party, which includes New Zealand, to evaluate noise and reverberation control for school rooms.
While the detrimental effects of noise in classroom situations are not limited to children experiencing disability, those with a disability that affects their processing of speech and verbal communicate could be extremely vulnerable.|While the detrimental effects of noise in classroom situations are not limited to children experiencing disability, those with a disability that affects their processing of speech and verbal communication could be extremely vulnerable.
The auditory function deficits in question include hearing impairment, autistic spectrum disorders (ASD) and attention deficit disorders (ADD/ADHD).Autism is considered a neurological and genetic life-long disorder that causes discrepancies in the way information is process.|The auditory function deficits in question include hearing impairment, autistic spectrum disorders (ASD) and attention deficit disorders (ADD/ADHD).Autism is considered a neurological and genetic life-long disorder that causes discrepancies in the way information is processed.
This disorder is characterised by interlinking problems with sociality imagination, sociality communication and sociality interaction.|This disorder is characterised by interlinking problems with social imagination, social communication and social interaction.
According to Janzen, this affects the ability to understand and relate in typical ways to people, understand events and object in the environment, and understand or respond to sensory stimuli.|According to Janzen, this affects the ability to understand and relate in typical ways to people, understand events and objects in the environment, and understand or respond to sensory stimuli.
Autism does not allow learning or thinking in the same ways as in children who are developing normally.Autistic spectrum disorders often result in major difficulties in comprehensive verbal information and speech processing.|Autism does not allow learning or thinking in the same ways as in children who are developing normally.Autistic spectrum disorders often result in major difficulties in comprehending verbal information and speech processing.
Those experiencing these disorders often find sounds such as crowd noise and the noise generative by machinery painful and distressing.|Those experiencing these disorders often find sounds such as crowd noise and the noise generated by machinery painful and distressing.
This is difficult to scientifically quantify as such extra-sensory stimuli variable greatly from one autistic individual to another.|This is difficult to scientifically quantify as such extra-sensory stimuli vary greatly from one autistic individual to another.
But a child who finds any type of noise in their classroom or learning space intrusive is likely to be adversely affected in their ability to process information.The attention deficit disorders are indicative of neurological and genetic disorders and are characterised by difficulties with sustenance attention, effort and persistence, organisation skills and disinhibition.|But a child who finds any type of noise in their classroom or learning space intrusive is likely to be adversely affected in their ability to process information.The attention deficit disorders are indicative of neurological and genetic disorders and are characterised by difficulties with sustaining attention, effort and persistence, organisation skills and disinhibition.
Children experiencing these disorders find it difficult to screen out unimportant information, and focus on everything in the environment rather than attending to a single active.|Children experiencing these disorders find it difficult to screen out unimportant information, and focus on everything in the environment rather than attending to a single activity.
Background noise in the classroom becomes a major distraction, which can affect their ability to concentrate.Children experiencing an auditory function deficit can often find speak and communication very difficult to isolate and process when set against high levels of background noise.|Background noise in the classroom becomes a major distraction, which can affect their ability to concentrate.Children experiencing an auditory function deficit can often find speech and communication very difficult to isolate and process when set against high levels of background noise.
These levels come from outside activities that penetrate the classroom structure, from teaching activities, and other noisy generated inside, which can be exacerbated by room reverberation.|These levels come from outside activities that penetrate the classroom structure, from teaching activities, and other noise generated inside, which can be exacerbated by room reverberation.
Strategies are needed to obtainment the optimum classroom construction and perhaps a change in classroom culture and methods of teaching.|Strategies are needed to obtain the optimum classroom construction and perhaps a change in classroom culture and methods of teaching.
In particular, the effects of noisy classrooms and activities on those experience disabilities in the form of auditory function deficit need thorough investigation.|In particular, the effects of noisy classrooms and activities on those experiencing disabilities in the form of auditory function deficit need thorough investigation.
It is probable that many undiagnosed children exist in the educational system with ' invisible ' disabilities.|It is probable that many undiagnosed children exist in the education system with ' invisible ' disabilities.
Their needs are less likely to be met than those of children with known disabilities.The New Zealand govern has developed a New Zealand Disability Strategy and has embarked on a wide-ranging consultation process.|Their needs are less likely to be met than those of children with known disabilities.The New Zealand Government has developed a New Zealand Disability Strategy and has embarked on a wide-ranging consultation process.
The strategy recognises that people experiencing disability face significance barriers in achieving a full quality of life in areas such as attitude, education, employment and access to services.|The strategy recognises that people experiencing disability face significant barriers in achieving a full quality of life in areas such as attitude, education, employment and access to services.
Objective 3 of the New Zealand Disability Strategy is to 'Provide the Best educate for Disabled People' by improving education so that all children, youth learners and adult learners will have equal opportunities to learn and develop within their already existing local school.|Objective 3 of the New Zealand Disability Strategy is to 'Provide the Best Education for Disabled People' by improving education so that all children, youth learners and adult learners will have equal opportunities to learn and develop within their already existing local school.
For a successful education, the learning environment is vitally significant, so any effort to improve this is likely to be of great benefit to all children, but especially to those with auditory function disabilities.A number of countries are already in the process of formulating their owner standards for the control and reduction of classroom noise.|For a successful education, the learning environment is vitally significant, so any effort to improve this is likely to be of great benefit to all children, but especially to those with auditory function disabilities.A number of countries are already in the process of formulating their own standards for the control and reduction of classroom noise.
New Zealand will probably following their example.|New Zealand will probably follow their example.
The literature to date on noise in school rooms appears to focus on the effective on schoolchildren in general, their teachers and the hearing impaired.|The literature to date on noise in school rooms appears to focus on the effects on schoolchildren in general, their teachers and the hearing impaired.
It is imperative that the need of these children are taken into account in the setting of appropriate international standards to be promulgated in future.|It is imperative that the needs of these children are taken into account in the setting of appropriate international standards to be promulgated in future.
China is trying to assuage concerns about skyrocketing prices as its major coal mining hubs grapple with heavy rains and deadly accidents, problems that are compound efforts to address power shortages.|China is trying to assuage concerns about skyrocketing prices as its major coal mining hubs grapple with heavy rains and deadly accidents, problems that are compounding efforts to address power shortages.
Some leaders in India, meanwhile, are warner that key regions including the capital, New Delhi, could face a "power crisis" as the cost of electricity rises, even as the central government says the country has enough coal supplies to meet demand.|Some leaders in India, meanwhile, are warning that key regions including the capital, New Delhi, could face a "power crisis" as the cost of electricity rises, even as the central government says the country has enough coal supplies to meet demand.
But supply isn't keeping up.In China, power shortages are the result of a combination of factors, from China's post-pandemic construction boom, to its national push to reduce carbon emissions that led hundreds of coal mines to shut down or slash production earlier this year.Restrictions on coal from key supplier Australia and weather woes have exacerbated the issue — and the latter issue has been acute this week, as heavy rains slam Shanxi and Shaanxi provinces, two key mining hubs that account for nearly half of the country's coal output.The price of thermal coal, which is primarily used to generate power, has continued to rise.|But supply isn't keeping up.In China, power shortages are the result of a combination of factors, from China's post-pandemic construction boom, to its national push to reduce carbon emissions that led hundreds of coal mines to shut down or slash production earlier this year.Restrictions on coal from key supplier Australia and weather woes have exacerbated the issue — and the latter issue has been acute this week, as heavy rains slammed Shanxi and Shaanxi provinces, two key mining hubs that account for nearly half of the country's coal output.The price of thermal coal, which is primarily used to generate power, has continued to rise.
Futures surged 11% Tuesday on the Zhengzhou Commodity Exchange to a newness record of nearly 1,508 yuan ($234) per metric ton.|Futures surged 11% Tuesday on the Zhengzhou Commodity Exchange to a new record of nearly 1,508 yuan ($234) per metric ton.
"We expect China's coal and power supply crunch to persist into the winter," Citi analysts wrote in a Tuesday research report, adding that the problem would "increase stagflation risks and growth pressure on the Chinese and global economy over the coming winter, [pushing] energy prices higher.|"We expect China's coal and power supply crunch to persist into the winter," Citi analysts wrote in a Tuesday research report, adding that the problem would "increase stagflation risks and growth pressures on the Chinese and global economy over the coming winter, [pushing] energy prices higher.
"The "extremely abnormality" weather forced 60 coal mines in Shanxi to shut down at the start of this month, according to an article posted Monday on the Ministry of Emergency Management's website.|"The "extremely abnormal" weather forced 60 coal mines in Shanxi to shut down at the start of this month, according to an article posted Monday on the Ministry of Emergency Management's website.
Almost all of them have since resumed production, the Shanxi government saying Tuesday, though four remain halted.|Almost all of them have since resumed production, the Shanxi government said Tuesday, though four remain halted.
The National Reform and Development Commission — China's top economic planner — has tried to calm concern about the unfolding problem, reiterating Tuesday that the government is going to allow coal-fired power producers to charge more for energy.Starting Friday, all industrial and commercial energy users will have to buy electricity at "market-oriented" prices, the agency said.|The National Reform and Development Commission — China's top economic planner — has tried to calm concerns about the unfolding problem, reiterating Tuesday that the government is going to allow coal-fired power producers to charge more for energy.Starting Friday, all industrial and commercial energy users will have to buy electricity at "market-oriented" prices, the agency said.
Beijing has already made clear that power prices will be allowed to rise by as much as 20% from currentness base levels, or benchmark prices set by the government.|Beijing has already made clear that power prices will be allowed to rise by as much as 20% from current base levels, or benchmark prices set by the government.
rightness now, the limit is 10%.|Right now, the limit is 10%.
Residents and the agricultural industry will not be affected, the agency said.In India, meanwhile, state leaders are warner the central government about the risks of a coal shortage.|Residents and the agricultural industry will not be affected, the agency said.In India, meanwhile, state leaders are warning the central government about the risks of a coal shortage.
Over the weekend, Delhi Chief ministerial Arvind Kejriwal tweeted that the capital "could face a power crisis," adding that he recently wrote to Prime ministerial Narendra Modi to warn him of energy shortages.|Over the weekend, Delhi Chief Minister Arvind Kejriwal tweeted that the capital "could face a power crisis," adding that he recently wrote to Prime Minister Narendra Modi to warn him of energy shortages.
Kejriwal called on the government to divert supplies of coal and gas to utilise supplying the capital, saying it was "essential to maintain uninterrupted power in Delhi, which is catering to strategic and important installations of national importance.|Kejriwal called on the government to divert supplies of coal and gas to utilities supplying the capital, saying it was "essential to maintain uninterrupted power in Delhi, which is catering to strategic and important installations of national importance.
The agency added that government-owned mine giant Coal India has stock of more than 40 million metric tons.|The agency added that government-owned mining giant Coal India has stock of more than 40 million metric tons.
"Any fear of dbeingruption in power supply being entirely mbeingplaced," the minbeingtry said.|"Any fear of disruption in power supply is entirely misplaced," the ministry said.
Nonetheless, the situation in India "remains precariousness," analysts at ANZ Research wrote Tuesday.|Nonetheless, the situation in India "remains precarious," analysts at ANZ Research wrote Tuesday.
While Coal India says its daily supplies have risen, the analysts noted that some provinces being "getting less than half their contracted volumes" and that power shortages in Punjab and Jharkhand states being worsening.Citing internal company documents leaked by Facebook whistleblower Frances Haugen, Blumenthal wrote that Facebook "appears to have concealed vital information from us about teen mental health and addiction.|While Coal India says its daily supplies have risen, the analysts noted that some provinces are "getting less than half their contracted volumes" and that power shortages in Punjab and Jharkhand states are worsening.Citing internal company documents leaked by Facebook whistleblower Frances Haugen, Blumenthal wrote that Facebook "appears to have concealed vital information from us about teen mental health and addiction.
When I sought specific information about Instagram and teens in an August letter, Facebook provided clearly evasive and misleading answers that have now being directly disputed by Ms.|When I sought specific information about Instagram and teens in an August letter, Facebook provided clearly evasive and misleading answers that have now been directly disputed by Ms.
"As part of a series built on the leaked documents, the Wall Street Journal reported in September that Facebook research have been conducting studies for the past three years into how Instagram, which it owns, affects its millions of young users.|"As part of a series built on the leaked documents, the Wall Street Journal reported in September that Facebook researchers have been conducting studies for the past three years into how Instagram, which it owns, affects its millions of young users.
The research shows the platform can damage mental health and bodily image, especially among teenaged girls.|The research shows the platform can damage mental health and body image, especially among teenaged girls.
The Journal's reporting, and the renewed pressure from lawmakers in its aftermath, also appearance to force Instagram to rethink its plans to introduce a version of its service for kids under 13.|The Journal's reporting, and the renewed pressure from lawmakers in its aftermath, also appeared to force Instagram to rethink its plans to introduce a version of its service for kids under 13.
Days before Facebook's globe head of safety, Antigone Davis, testified before Blumenthal's Commerce subcommittee, Instagram said it would press pause on the project.|Days before Facebook's global head of safety, Antigone Davis, testified before Blumenthal's Commerce subcommittee, Instagram said it would press pause on the project.
Blumenthal said he was dismayed that in her testimony, Davis "appearance to have provided false or inaccurate testimony to me regarding attempts to internally conceal its research."|Blumenthal said he was dismayed that in her testimony, Davis "appears to have provided false or inaccurate testimony to me regarding attempts to internally conceal its research."
"Notably, in response to direct questions about whether Facebook has lockage down or shut out access to documents, Ms. Davis stated 'it's not my understanding that we've done that"' and committed to following up with my office about any changes in that understanding.|"Notably, in response to direct questions about whether Facebook has locked down or shut out access to documents, Ms. Davis stated 'it's not my understanding that we've done that"' and committed to following up with my office about any changes in that understanding.
However, last week, several media outlets reporting that [Facebook] has locked down documents from the Facebook Integrity team.|However, last week, several media outlets reported that [Facebook] has locked down documents from the Facebook Integrity team.
Auxiliary police officers on white motorcycles complete a final sweep.|Auxiliary police officers on white motorcycles completed a final sweep.
Behind the fences, the dark silhouette of a large planar glided silently to the gate.At 11pm sharp, a roughly 2km-stretch of the road was blocked off.|Behind the fences, the dark silhouette of a large plane glided silently to the gate.At 11pm sharp, a roughly 2km-stretch of the road was blocked off.
It had earlier been stripped of its lamp posts and fit with low floodlights on either side.|It had earlier been stripped of its lamp posts and fitted with low floodlights on either side.
Everything was now ready for the operative to commence.|Everything was now ready for the operation to commence.
In an operation lasting a few hours, two Singapore Airlines' (SIA) Airbus A380s were towed on their final trip to Changi Exhibition Centre, where they will be take apart.|In an operation lasting a few hours, two Singapore Airlines' (SIA) Airbus A380s were towed on their final trip to Changi Exhibition Centre, where they will be taken apart.
This is the first time that SIA is scrapper its superjumbos locally.|This is the first time that SIA is scrapping its superjumbos locally.
The planes, registration numerical 9V-SKH and 9V-SKG, are among seven A380s that SIA had announced in November last year it would retire, amid a first half net loss of S$3.5 billion as passenger numerical fell by almost 99 per cent due to the COVID-19 pandemic.|The planes, registration numbers 9V-SKH and 9V-SKG, are among seven A380s that SIA had announced in November last year it would retire, amid a first half net loss of S$3.5 billion as passenger numbers fell by almost 99 per cent due to the COVID-19 pandemic.
The aircraft were delivered in May and June 2009, accordant to data from aviation website Planespotters.|The aircraft were delivered in May and June 2009, according to data from aviation website Planespotters.
Five A380s that SIA previously retired – all of which had been in service for about a decade – were flown overseas before being stored or partitive out.|Five A380s that SIA previously retired – all of which had been in service for about a decade – were flown overseas before being stored or parted out.
"From my perspective, usually aircraft are parting out overseas," FlightGlobal Asia managing editor Greg Waldron told CNA.|"From my perspective, usually aircraft are parted out overseas," FlightGlobal Asia managing editor Greg Waldron told CNA.
An SIA spokesperson told CNA the decision to scrap the A380s locally being based on factors including the expertise of local and international vendors, the closure of international borders and the cost of dismantling the aircraft.|An SIA spokesperson told CNA the decision to scrap the A380s locally was based on factors including the expertise of local and international vendors, the closure of international borders and the cost of dismantling the aircraft.
A road closure notice on the Land Transport Authority's OneMotoring website said the towing operation was organised by Hunt Way manage Consultancy Services.|A road closure notice on the Land Transport Authority's OneMotoring website said the towing operation was organised by Hunt Way Management Consultancy Services.
"Generally, (scrapper aircraft) is a fairly specialised operation.|"Generally, (scrapping aircraft) is a fairly specialised operation.
You really need to know your way around the airplane, how to do it safely and correctly, and also to retentive value, like you don't want to damage the components that you're trying to sell," Mr Waldron said.|You really need to know your way around the airplane, how to do it safely and correctly, and also to retain value, like you don't want to damage the components that you're trying to sell," Mr Waldron said.
They've maintained all sorts of aircraft over the years, they knowing their way around the A380.|They've maintained all sorts of aircraft over the years, they know their way around the A380.
While the road was closeness to traffic, cyclists and pedestrians, a small group of aviation enthusiasts found a way to catch a glimpse of the unprecedented operation.|While the road was closed to traffic, cyclists and pedestrians, a small group of aviation enthusiasts found a way to catch a glimpse of the unprecedented operation.
About 10 people waited near the eastern end of the blockade, arm with tripods, DSLRs and zoom lenses.|About 10 people waited near the eastern end of the blockade, armed with tripods, DSLRs and zoom lenses.
One of them was polytechnic study Yeong Zi Feng, who turned up at around 11.30pm with his camera.|One of them was polytechnic student Yeong Zi Feng, who turned up at around 11.30pm with his camera.
The 18-year-old had driven around the areal since 10pm to find a good spot.|The 18-year-old had driven around the area since 10pm to find a good spot.
"The A380 is a big aircraft, so it's not like you get to seeing this kind of thing in every country.|"The A380 is a big aircraft, so it's not like you get to see this kind of thing in every country.
The two had met while taking pictural of planes before coincidentally joining the same aviation management course in Temasek Polytechnic.|The two had met while taking pictures of planes before coincidentally joining the same aviation management course in Temasek Polytechnic.
"We hope to completeness the collection," he added.|"We hope to complete the collection," he added.
It was the first A380, with its engines and nose cone removal.|It was the first A380, with its engines and nose cone removed.
rightness behind this A380 was an SIA Boeing 777-200ER, which will also be scrapped.|Right behind this A380 was an SIA Boeing 777-200ER, which will also be scrapped.
"These parts can being upcycled and repurposed to create unique retail products and art pieces, and will also being used to support educational institutions, artists and persons with disabilities," SIA said in a press release on the initiative.|"These parts can be upcycled and repurposed to create unique retail products and art pieces, and will also be used to support educational institutions, artists and persons with disabilities," SIA said in a press release on the initiative.
Mr Waldron said "there's a lot of value" in oldness aircraft, ranging from its engines to spare parts.|Mr Waldron said "there's a lot of value" in old aircraft, ranging from its engines to spare parts.
"The first thing they'll take off is the engines and those of course can be used on other A380s or can be used for spare part," he said.|"The first thing they'll take off is the engines and those of course can be used on other A380s or can be used for spare parts," he said.
SIA became the first airline to launch A380 services amid fanfare in October 2007, but return the first two aircraft to their German financiers when leases expired about 10 years later.|SIA became the first airline to launch A380 services amid fanfare in October 2007, but returned the first two aircraft to their German financiers when leases expired about 10 years later.
While many have lauded the A380's quiet and spacious cabin, demand for the 544-seater has fallen as many airlines drop the industry’s largest four-engined aircraft in favour of smaller twin-engined ones that being more efficient and easier to fill.|While many have lauded the A380's quiet and spacious cabin, demand for the 544-seater has fallen as many airlines drop the industry’s largest four-engined aircraft in favour of smaller twin-engined ones that are more efficient and easier to fill.
And also basically it being really only suited for very specific routes, like between major hubs.|And also basically it was really only suited for very specific routes, like between major hubs.
You can't put it onto smaller routes because the aircraft is justness too big," Mr Waldron said.|You can't put it onto smaller routes because the aircraft is just too big," Mr Waldron said.
"The other beingsue that's happened too being competing aircraft like the Boeing 777-300ER, and now the Boeing 787 and Airbus A350, have very good seat costs from an airline perspective.|"The other issue that's happened too is competing aircraft like the Boeing 777-300ER, and now the Boeing 787 and Airbus A350, have very good seat costs from an airline perspective.
So, the cost of operating the other aircraft is significantly lower, and that's being the downfall of the A380."|So, the cost of operating the other aircraft is significantly lower, and that's been the downfall of the A380."
Still, according to air travel website Mainly Miles, SIA has commitment to fitting all 12 of its remaining A380s with new cabin products, an indication that they could return to service as demand picks up.|Still, according to air travel website Mainly Miles, SIA has committed to fitting all 12 of its remaining A380s with new cabin products, an indication that they could return to service as demand picks up.
Some of these planes being still parked in the aircraft storage facility in Alice Springs, Australia.|Some of these planes are still parked in the aircraft storage facility in Alice Springs, Australia.
"(The A380) remains extremely popular among passengers, because it's big, comfortableness and very quiet, so it's definitely an iconic aircraft.|"(The A380) remains extremely popular among passengers, because it's big, comfortable and very quiet, so it's definitely an iconic aircraft.
But unfortunately, it doern't quite work out for Airbus," Mr Waldron added.|But unfortunately, it didn't quite work out for Airbus," Mr Waldron added.
Dozens of cameras surround the subject and record a 360-degree video, capturer its dimensions and volume.|Dozens of cameras surround the subject and record a 360-degree video, capturing its dimensions and volume.
The differ viewpoints are then merged to create a digitized 3D image.|The different viewpoints are then merged to create a digitized 3D image.
Typically, the process is carried out by technicians in a professional studio — both time-consuming and expend.|Typically, the process is carried out by technicians in a professional studio — both time-consuming and expensive.
But this could be about to change, as Irish startup Volograms have made the process available to anyone with an iPhone via its free app Volu.|But this could be about to change, as Irish startup Volograms has made the process available to anyone with an iPhone via its free app Volu.
Launched on the App Store in September and soon to be available on Android, it's the first content creation app capable of turning stand mobile video into augmented reality, Volograms says.|Launched on the App Store in September and soon to be available on Android, it's the first content creation app capable of turning standard mobile video into augmented reality, Volograms says.
While the phonetic camera only captures video from one angle, the app uses artificial intelligence to estimate the 3D shape and texture of a person in areas that the camera does not see.|While the phone camera only captures video from one angle, the app uses artificial intelligence to estimate the 3D shape and texture of a person in areas that the camera does not see.
It uses algorithms that have been trained on thousands of human models capturer in Vologram's professional studios.|It uses algorithms that have been trained on thousands of human models captured in Vologram's professional studios.
Then it convertible the moving image to a hologram, or what the company refers to as a "vologram."|Then it converts the moving image to a hologram, or what the company refers to as a "vologram."
Users can then play with the vologram in creativity ways, shrinking or enlarging the figure and superimposing it on any backdrop, adding filters that change the transparency or color of the image, and mixing realities by adding a virtual doppelganger to a standard video.|Users can then play with the vologram in creative ways, shrinking or enlarging the figure and superimposing it on any backdrop, adding filters that change the transparency or color of the image, and mixing realities by adding a virtual doppelganger to a standard video.
A report from market research firm eMarketer estimates that this year in the United States alone, almost 60 million people will use VR and more than 90 million will use AR at least once per month — a rise of 36% and 28% respectively, comparing to 2019.|A report from market research firm eMarketer estimates that this year in the United States alone, almost 60 million people will use VR and more than 90 million will use AR at least once per month — a rise of 36% and 28% respectively, compared to 2019.
The technology is mostly usage for gaming, entertainment and social media, but as consumers and businesses test out immersive experiences, a wider variety of applications could emerge.|The technology is mostly used for gaming, entertainment and social media, but as consumers and businesses test out immersive experiences, a wider variety of applications could emerge.
Facebook (FB) has launched a VR app that lets users (represented by customizable avatars) sit in a virtual conference room with coworkers, and this week annunciatory plans to hire 10,000 people in Europe to build the "metaverse."|Facebook (FB) has launched a VR app that lets users (represented by customizable avatars) sit in a virtual conference room with coworkers, and this week announced plans to hire 10,000 people in Europe to build the "metaverse."
Other company have also stepped up to meet the demand.|Other companies have also stepped up to meet the demand.
UK-based Dimension, which has partnered with Microsoft (MSFT), creates 3D videos in its high-tech studio, ranging from fashion shows to sport events.|UK-based Dimension, which has partnered with Microsoft (MSFT), creates 3D videos in its high-tech studio, ranging from fashion shows to sports events.
4D Views, a French company, designs and sells its volumetric video capture technological to studios around the world.|4D Views, a French company, designs and sells its volumetric video capture technology to studios around the world.
But Volograms, which says it has raised €2.3 million ($2.7 million) in funding since it was founded in 2018, is one of the few making volumetric capture availableness to everyday consumers.|But Volograms, which says it has raised €2.3 million ($2.7 million) in funding since it was founded in 2018, is one of the few making volumetric capture available to everyday consumers.
The Volu app is freeing, although the company says it plans to incorporate paid-for "pro features."|The Volu app is free, although the company says it plans to incorporate paid-for "pro features."
Currently, Volograms' main source of income stillness comes from its professional studio service.|Currently, Volograms' main source of income still comes from its professional studio service.
Cathy Hackl, a tech futurist specializing in AR and VR, believes that there's strong demand for both "high quality Hollywood content" produced by professionals and amateur content creation on a smartphone.|Cathy Hackl, a tech futurist specializing in AR and VR, believes that there's strong demand for both "high quality Hollywood content" produced by professionals and amateur content created on a smartphone.
But the latter will be crucial in driving mass adopt of the technology, she says.|But the latter will be crucial in driving mass adoption of the technology, she says.
"Giving the tools to people now, so that they can access [the technology] on their phones and create thbeing content being very powerful," she tells CNN Business.|"Giving the tools to people now, so that they can access [the technology] on their phones and create this content is very powerful," she tells CNN Business.
"Giving the tools to people now, so that they can access [the technology] on their phones and create thbeing content being very powerful," she tells CNN Business.|"Giving the tools to people now, so that they can access [the technology] on their phones and create this content is very powerful," she tells CNN Business.
By breaking down the barriers to entry, Pagés hope Volu will empower a "new generation of creators" and transform communication as we know it.|By breaking down the barriers to entry, Pagés hopes Volu will empower a "new generation of creators" and transform communication as we know it.
Wright, who topped the Powerlist 2022 ranking from Powerful Media, told CNN Business that her career may not have taken off in the United Kingdom because there are fewer opportunities and a lack of Black womanise role models at the top of the corporate ladder.|Wright, who topped the Powerlist 2022 ranking from Powerful Media, told CNN Business that her career may not have taken off in the United Kingdom because there are fewer opportunities and a lack of Black women role models at the top of the corporate ladder.
Wright was born in London, but her career has spanned the United States and the United Kingdom, including chief inform officer roles at BP (BP) and GE (GE).|Wright was born in London, but her career has spanned the United States and the United Kingdom, including chief information officer roles at BP (BP) and GE (GE).
But we think this technology could be easily integrated into the headset or into [smart] glass, so that it can become the next generation camera."|But we think this technology could be easily integrated into the headset or into [smart] glasses, so that it can become the next generation camera."
She took a secondment from Microsoft in 2017 and worked for two years as chief digital officer for the UK government's taxable and customs department, overseeing the agency's digital transformation and efforts to simplify taxable collection.|She took a secondment from Microsoft in 2017 and worked for two years as chief digital officer for the UK government's tax and customs department, overseeing the agency's digital transformation and efforts to simplify tax collection.
Wright's father was born in Jamaica and server in the Royal Air Force during World War II.|Wright's father was born in Jamaica and served in the Royal Air Force during World War II.
Some of the foundations that had given me support weren’t too pleased to have been mentioned, however, because it led to a great increase in apply.|Some of the foundations that had given me support weren’t too pleased to have been mentioned, however, because it led to a great increase in applications.
I doern’t think anyone, my publishers, my agent, or myself, expected the book to doer anything like as well as it did.|I don’t think anyone, my publishers, my agent, or myself, expected the book to do anything like as well as it did.
It was in the London Sunday Times best-seller list for 237 weeks, long than any other book (apparently, the Bible and Shakespeare aren’t counted).|It was in the London Sunday Times best-seller list for 237 weeks, longer than any other book (apparently, the Bible and Shakespeare aren’t counted).
It has been translated into something like forty languages and has sold about one copy for every 750 men, women, and children in the worldly.|It has been translated into something like forty languages and has sold about one copy for every 750 men, women, and children in the world.
As Nathan Myhrvold of Microsoft (a former post-doc of mine) remark: I have sold more books on physics than Madonna has on sex.|As Nathan Myhrvold of Microsoft (a former post-doc of mine) remarked: I have sold more books on physics than Madonna has on sex.
And why being the universe the way it being?|And why is the universe the way it is?
I have taken the opportunity to update the book and inclusive new theoretical and observational results obtained since the book was first published (on April Fools’ Day, 1988).|I have taken the opportunity to update the book and include new theoretical and observational results obtained since the book was first published (on April Fools’ Day, 1988).
I have included a newness chapter on wormholes and time travel.|I have included a new chapter on wormholes and time travel.
Einstein’s General Theory of Relativity seems to offer the possibility that we could create and maintain wormholes, littleness tubes that connect different regions of space-time.|Einstein’s General Theory of Relativity seems to offer the possibility that we could create and maintain wormholes, little tubes that connect different regions of space-time.
but I discuss a possible explain for this.|but I discuss a possible explanation for this.
I also describe the progress that has been making recently in finding “dualities” or correspondences between apparently different theories of physics.|I also describe the progress that has been made recently in finding “dualities” or correspondences between apparently different theories of physics.
These correspond are a strong indication that there is a complete unified theory of physics, but they also suggest that it may not be possible to express this theory in a single fundamental formulation.|These correspondences are a strong indication that there is a complete unified theory of physics, but they also suggest that it may not be possible to express this theory in a single fundamental formulation.
It might be like our being unable to represent the surface of the earth on a single map and having to use differ maps in differ regions.|It might be like our being unable to represent the surface of the earth on a single map and having to use different maps in different regions.
On the observational side, by far the most important developmental has been the measurement of fluctuations in the cosmic microwave background radiation by COBE (the Cosmic Background Explorer satellite) and other collaborations.|On the observational side, by far the most important development has been the measurement of fluctuations in the cosmic microwave background radiation by COBE (the Cosmic Background Explorer satellite) and other collaborations.
These fluctuations are the finger-prints of creation, tiny initial irregular in the otherwise smooth and uniform early universe that later grew into galaxies, stars, and all the structures we see around us.|These fluctuations are the finger-prints of creation, tiny initial irregularities in the otherwise smooth and uniform early universe that later grew into galaxies, stars, and all the structures we see around us.
Their form agrees with the predictions of the proposal that the universe has no boundaries or edges in the imaginary time direction; but further observe will be necessary to distinguish this proposal from other possible explanations for the fluctuations in the background.|Their form agrees with the predictions of the proposal that the universe has no boundaries or edges in the imaginary time direction; but further observations will be necessary to distinguish this proposal from other possible explanations for the fluctuations in the background.
However, within a few years we should know whether we can believe that we live in a universe that is completely self-contained and without beginning or end.Most people would find the picture of our universe as an infinite tower of tortoises rather ridiculous, but why do we think we know wellness?|However, within a few years we should know whether we can believe that we live in a universe that is completely self-contained and without beginning or end.Most people would find the picture of our universe as an infinite tower of tortoises rather ridiculous, but why do we think we know better?
What do we knowing about the universe, and how do we knowing it?|What do we know about the universe, and how do we know it?
Where did the universe coming from, and where is it going?|Where did the universe come from, and where is it going?
Did the universe have a beginning, and if so, what happening before then?|Did the universe have a beginning, and if so, what happened before then?
Recent break_through in physics, made possible in part by fantastic new technologies, suggest answers to some of these longstanding questions.|Recent breakthroughs in physics, made possible in part by fantastic new technologies, suggest answers to some of these longstanding questions.
Someday these answers may seem as obvious to us as the earth orbiter the sun – or perhaps as ridiculous as a tower of tortoises.|Someday these answers may seem as obvious to us as the earth orbiting the sun – or perhaps as ridiculous as a tower of tortoises.
As long ago as 340 BC the Greek philosopher Aristotle, in his book On the Heavens, was able to put forward two good argue for believing that the earth was a round sphere rather than a Hat plate.|As long ago as 340 BC the Greek philosopher Aristotle, in his book On the Heavens, was able to put forward two good arguments for believing that the earth was a round sphere rather than a Hat plate.
First, he realized that eclipses of the moon were causative by the earth coming between the sun and the moon.|First, he realized that eclipses of the moon were caused by the earth coming between the sun and the moon.
The earth’s shadow on the moon being always round, which would be true only if the earth being spherical.|The earth’s shadow on the moon was always round, which would be true only if the earth was spherical.
If the earth had been a flat disk, the shadow would have been elongated and ellipse, unless the eclipse always occurred at a time when the sun was directly under the center of the disk.|If the earth had been a flat disk, the shadow would have been elongated and elliptical, unless the eclipse always occurred at a time when the sun was directly under the center of the disk.
Second, the Greeks knew from their travels that the North Star appeared lower in the sky when viewed in the south than it doer in more northerly regions.|Second, the Greeks knew from their travels that the North Star appeared lower in the sky when viewed in the south than it did in more northerly regions.
(Since the North Star lies over the North polar, it appears to be directly above an observer at the North polar, but to someone looking from the equator, it appears to lie just at the horizon.|(Since the North Star lies over the North Pole, it appears to be directly above an observer at the North Pole, but to someone looking from the equator, it appears to lie just at the horizon.
From the difference in the apparent position of the North starry in Egypt and Greece, Aristotle even quoted an estimate that the distance around the earth was 400,000 stadia.|From the difference in the apparent position of the North Star in Egypt and Greece, Aristotle even quoted an estimate that the distance around the earth was 400,000 stadia.
The Greeks even had a third argument that the earth must be round, for why else does one first seeing the sails of a ship coming over the horizon, and only later seeing the hull?Aristotle thought the earth was stationary and that the sun, the moon, the planets, and the stars moved in circular orbits about the earth.|The Greeks even had a third argument that the earth must be round, for why else does one first see the sails of a ship coming over the horizon, and only later see the hull?Aristotle thought the earth was stationary and that the sun, the moon, the planets, and the stars moved in circular orbits about the earth.
He believed this because he felt, for mystical reason, that the earth was the center of the universe, and that circular motion was the most perfect.|He believed this because he felt, for mystical reasons, that the earth was the center of the universe, and that circular motion was the most perfect.
This ideate was elaborated by Ptolemy in the second century AD into a complete cosmological model.|This idea was elaborated by Ptolemy in the second century AD into a complete cosmological model.
The earth stood at the center, surrounded by eight spheres that carry the moon, the sun, the stars, and the five planets known at the time, Mercury, Venus, Mars, Jupiter, and Saturn.The planets themselves moved on smaller circles attached to their respective spheres in order to account for their rather complicated observed paths in the sky.|The earth stood at the center, surrounded by eight spheres that carried the moon, the sun, the stars, and the five planets known at the time, Mercury, Venus, Mars, Jupiter, and Saturn.The planets themselves moved on smaller circles attached to their respective spheres in order to account for their rather complicated observed paths in the sky.
The outermost spherical carried the so-called fixed stars, which always stay in the same positions relative to each other but which rotate together across the sky.|The outermost sphere carried the so-called fixed stars, which always stay in the same positions relative to each other but which rotate together across the sky.
What lay beyond the last sphere was never making very clear, but it certainly was not part of mankind’s observable universe.|What lay beyond the last sphere was never made very clear, but it certainly was not part of mankind’s observable universe.
Ptolemy’s model provision a reasonably accurate system for predicting the positions of heavenly bodies in the sky.|Ptolemy’s model provided a reasonably accurate system for predicting the positions of heavenly bodies in the sky.
But in order to predict these positions correctly, Ptolemy had to making an assumption that the moon followed a path that sometimes brought it twice as close to the earth as at other times.|But in order to predict these positions correctly, Ptolemy had to make an assumption that the moon followed a path that sometimes brought it twice as close to the earth as at other times.
And that meant that the moon ought sometimes to appear twice as bigness as at other times!|And that meant that the moon ought sometimes to appear twice as big as at other times!
It was adopted by the Christian church as the picture of the universe that was in accordance with Scripture, for it had the great advantage that it left lots of room outside the sphere of fixed star for heaven and hell.|It was adopted by the Christian church as the picture of the universe that was in accordance with Scripture, for it had the great advantage that it left lots of room outside the sphere of fixed stars for heaven and hell.
The die blow to the Aristotelian/Ptolemaic theory came in 1609.|The death blow to the Aristotelian/Ptolemaic theory came in 1609.
In that year, Galileo started observing the night sky with a telescope, which had justness been invented.|In that year, Galileo started observing the night sky with a telescope, which had just been invented.
When he looked at the planet Jovian, Galileo found that it was accompanied by several small satellites or moons that orbited around it.|When he looked at the planet Jupiter, Galileo found that it was accompanied by several small satellites or moons that orbited around it.
This implied that everything doer not have to orbit directly around the earth, as Aristotle and Ptolemy had thought.|This implied that everything did not have to orbit directly around the earth, as Aristotle and Ptolemy had thought.
(It was, of course, still possibleness to believe that the earth was stationary at the center of the universe and that the moons of Jupiter moved on extremely complicated paths around the earth, giving the appearance that they orbited Jupiter.|(It was, of course, still possible to believe that the earth was stationary at the center of the universe and that the moons of Jupiter moved on extremely complicated paths around the earth, giving the appearance that they orbited Jupiter.
However, Copernicus’s theorise was much simpler.)|However, Copernicus’s theory was much simpler.)
At the same time, Johannes Kepler had modification Copernicus’s theory, suggesting that the planets moved not in circles but in ellipses (an ellipse is an elongated circle).|At the same time, Johannes Kepler had modified Copernicus’s theory, suggesting that the planets moved not in circles but in ellipses (an ellipse is an elongated circle).
The predictions now finally match the observations.|The predictions now finally matched the observations.
As far as Kepler being concerned, elliptical orbits were merely an ad hoc hypothesis, and a rather repugnant one at that, because ellipses were clearly less perfect than circles.|As far as Kepler was concerned, elliptical orbits were merely an ad hoc hypothesis, and a rather repugnant one at that, because ellipses were clearly less perfect than circles.
Having discovered almost by accident that elliptical orbits fit the observations well, he could not reconcile them with his idea that the planets being made to orbit the sun by magnetic forces.|Having discovered almost by accident that elliptical orbits fit the observations well, he could not reconcile them with his idea that the planets were made to orbit the sun by magnetic forces.
An explanation was provided only much later, in 1687, when Sir Isaac Newtonian published his Philosophiae Naturalis Principia Mathematica, probably the most important single work ever published in the physical sciences.|An explanation was provided only much later, in 1687, when Sir Isaac Newton published his Philosophiae Naturalis Principia Mathematica, probably the most important single work ever published in the physical sciences.
In it Newton not only put forward a theory of how bodies move in space and time, but he also developed the complicated mathematics needed to analyze those motion.|In it Newton not only put forward a theory of how bodies move in space and time, but he also developed the complicated mathematics needed to analyze those motions.
In addition, Newton postulator a law of universal gravitation according to which each body in the universe was attracted toward every other body by a force that was stronger the more massive the bodies and the closer they were to each other.|In addition, Newton postulated a law of universal gravitation according to which each body in the universe was attracted toward every other body by a force that was stronger the more massive the bodies and the closer they were to each other.
It was this same force that causative objects to fall to the ground.|It was this same force that caused objects to fall to the ground.
(The story that Newton was inspiratory by an apple hitting his head is almost certainly apocryphal.|(The story that Newton was inspired by an apple hitting his head is almost certainly apocryphal.
All Newton himself ever said was that the idea of gravity came to him as he sat “in a contemplative mood” and “was occasioned by the fall of an apple.”) Newton went on to show that, according to his law, gravity causes the moon to move in an elliptical orbit around the earth and causes the earth and the planets to following elliptical paths around the sun.|All Newton himself ever said was that the idea of gravity came to him as he sat “in a contemplative mood” and “was occasioned by the fall of an apple.”) Newton went on to show that, according to his law, gravity causes the moon to move in an elliptical orbit around the earth and causes the earth and the planets to follow elliptical paths around the sun.
The Copernican model got rid of Ptolemaic’s celestial spheres, and with them, the idea that the universe had a natural boundary.|The Copernican model got rid of Ptolemy’s celestial spheres, and with them, the idea that the universe had a natural boundary.
Since “fixed stars” did not appear to change their positions apart from a rotation across the sky caused by the earth spinning on its axis, it became natural to suppose that the fixed stars were objects like our sun but very muchness farther away.|Since “fixed stars” did not appear to change their positions apart from a rotation across the sky caused by the earth spinning on its axis, it became natural to suppose that the fixed stars were objects like our sun but very much farther away.
Newton realized that, accordance to his theory of gravity, the stars should attract each other, so it seemed they could not remain essentially motionless.|Newton realized that, according to his theory of gravity, the stars should attract each other, so it seemed they could not remain essentially motionless.
In a letter in 1691 to Richard Bentley, another leading thinker of his day, Newton argued that this would indeed happen if there were only a finite number of stars distributed over a finite region of spatial.|In a letter in 1691 to Richard Bentley, another leading thinker of his day, Newton argued that this would indeed happen if there were only a finite number of stars distributed over a finite region of space.
But he reasoned that if, on the other hand, there being an infinite number of stars, distributed more or less uniformly over infinite space, this would not happen, because there would not be any central point for them to fall to.|But he reasoned that if, on the other hand, there were an infinite number of stars, distributed more or less uniformly over infinite space, this would not happen, because there would not be any central point for them to fall to.
This argue is an instance of the pitfalls that you can encounter in talking about infinity.|This argument is an instance of the pitfalls that you can encounter in talking about infinity.
In an infinite universe, every point can be regarded as the center, because every point has an infinite number of starry on each side of it.|In an infinite universe, every point can be regarded as the center, because every point has an infinite number of stars on each side of it.
The correct approach, it was realized only much later, is to consider the finite situation, in which the stars all fall in on each other, and then to ask how things change if one additive more stars roughly uniformly distributed outside this region.|The correct approach, it was realized only much later, is to consider the finite situation, in which the stars all fall in on each other, and then to ask how things change if one adds more stars roughly uniformly distributed outside this region.
According to Newton’s law, the extra star would make no difference at all to the original ones on average, so the star would fall in just as fast.|According to Newton’s law, the extra stars would make no difference at all to the original ones on average, so the stars would fall in just as fast.
We can additive as many stars as we like, but they will still always collapse in on themselves.|We can add as many stars as we like, but they will still always collapse in on themselves.
We now knowable it is impossible to have an infinite static model of the universe in which gravity is always attractive.|We now know it is impossible to have an infinite static model of the universe in which gravity is always attractive.
It is an interesting reflection on the general climate of thought before the twentieth century that no one had suggested that the universe was expansion or contracting.|It is an interesting reflection on the general climate of thought before the twentieth century that no one had suggested that the universe was expanding or contracting.
It was generally accepted that either the universe have existed forever in an unchanging state, or that it have been created at a finite time in the past more or less as we observe it today.|It was generally accepted that either the universe had existed forever in an unchanging state, or that it had been created at a finite time in the past more or less as we observe it today.
In part thbeing may have been due to people’s tendency to believe in eternal truths, as well as the comfort they found in the thought that even though they may grow old and die, the universe being eternal and unchanging.|In part this may have been due to people’s tendency to believe in eternal truths, as well as the comfort they found in the thought that even though they may grow old and die, the universe is eternal and unchanging.
evenness those who realized that Newton’s theory of gravity showed that the universe could not be static did not think to suggest that it might be expanding.|Even those who realized that Newton’s theory of gravity showed that the universe could not be static did not think to suggest that it might be expanding.
This did not significantly affect their predictions of the motions of the planets, but it allowed an infinite distribution of star to remain in equilibrium – with the attractive forces between nearby star balanced by the repulsive forces from those that were farther away.|This did not significantly affect their predictions of the motions of the planets, but it allowed an infinite distribution of stars to remain in equilibrium – with the attractive forces between nearby stars balanced by the repulsive forces from those that were farther away.
However, we now believer such an equilibrium would be unstable: if the stars in some region got only slightly nearer each other, the attractive forces between them would become stronger and dominate over the repulsive forces so that the stars would continue to fall toward each other.|However, we now believe such an equilibrium would be unstable: if the stars in some region got only slightly nearer each other, the attractive forces between them would become stronger and dominate over the repulsive forces so that the stars would continue to fall toward each other.
On the other hand, if the stars got a bit farther awayness from each other, the repulsive forces would dominate and drive them farther apart.|On the other hand, if the stars got a bit farther away from each other, the repulsive forces would dominate and drive them farther apart.
Another object to an infinite static universe is normally ascribed to the German philosopher Heinrich Olbers, who wrote about this theory in 1823.|Another objection to an infinite static universe is normally ascribed to the German philosopher Heinrich Olbers, who wrote about this theory in 1823.
In fact, various contemporaries of Newton had raised the problem, and the Olbers article was not even the first to continent plausible arguments against it.|In fact, various contemporaries of Newton had raised the problem, and the Olbers article was not even the first to contain plausible arguments against it.
It was, however, the first to being widely noted.|It was, however, the first to be widely noted.
Thus one would expect that the whole sky would be as bright as the sun, evenness at night.|Thus one would expect that the whole sky would be as bright as the sun, even at night.
Olbers’ counter-argument was that the light from distant star would be dimmed by absorption by intervening matter.|Olbers’ counter-argument was that the light from distant stars would be dimmed by absorption by intervening matter.
However, if that happening the intervening matter would eventually heat up until it glowed as brightly as the stars.|However, if that happened the intervening matter would eventually heat up until it glowed as brightly as the stars.
The only way of avoidance the conclusion that the whole of the night sky should be as bright as the surface of the sun would be to assume that the stars had not been shining forever but had turned on at some finite time in the past.|The only way of avoiding the conclusion that the whole of the night sky should be as bright as the surface of the sun would be to assume that the stars had not been shining forever but had turned on at some finite time in the past.
In that case the absorbing matter might not have heated up yet or the light from distant star might not yet have reached us.|In that case the absorbing matter might not have heated up yet or the light from distant stars might not yet have reached us.
And that brings us to the question of what could have caused the stars to have turner on in the first place.The beginning of the universe had, of course, been discussed long before this.|And that brings us to the question of what could have caused the stars to have turned on in the first place.The beginning of the universe had, of course, been discussed long before this.
According to a number of early cosmologies and the Jewish/Christian/Muslim traditional, the universe started at a finite, and not very distant, time in the past.|According to a number of early cosmologies and the Jewish/Christian/Muslim tradition, the universe started at a finite, and not very distant, time in the past.
One argument for such a beginning was the feel that it was necessary to have “First Cause” to explain the existence of the universe.|One argument for such a beginning was the feeling that it was necessary to have “First Cause” to explain the existence of the universe.
(Within the universe, you always explained one eventuate as being caused by some earlier eventuate, but the existence of the universe itself could be explained in this way only if it had some beginning.)|(Within the universe, you always explained one event as being caused by some earlier event, but the existence of the universe itself could be explained in this way only if it had some beginning.)
Another argue was put forward by St. Augustine in his book The City of God.|Another argument was put forward by St. Augustine in his book The City of God.
(It is interesting that this is not so far from the end of the last Ice Age, about 10,000 BC, which is when archaeologists tell us that civilization really beginning.)|(It is interesting that this is not so far from the end of the last Ice Age, about 10,000 BC, which is when archaeologists tell us that civilization really began.)
Aristotle, and most of the otherness Greek philosophers, on the otherness hand, did not like the idea of a creation because it smacked too much of divine intervention.|Aristotle, and most of the other Greek philosophers, on the other hand, did not like the idea of a creation because it smacked too much of divine intervention.
The ancients had already considered the argument about progress described above, and answered it by saying that there had been periodic floods or otherness disasters that repeatedly set the human race right back to the beginning of civilization.|The ancients had already considered the argument about progress described above, and answered it by saying that there had been periodic floods or other disasters that repeatedly set the human race right back to the beginning of civilization.
The question of whether the universe had a beginning in time and whether it is limited in space were later extensively examined by the philosopher Immanuel Kant in his monumental (and very obscure) work Critique of Pure Reason, published in 1781.|The questions of whether the universe had a beginning in time and whether it is limited in space were later extensively examined by the philosopher Immanuel Kant in his monumental (and very obscure) work Critique of Pure Reason, published in 1781.
He called these questions antinomies (that is, contradictions) of pure reason because he felt that there were equally compelling arguments for believing the thesis, that the universe had a beginning, and the antithesis, that it had existent forever.|He called these questions antinomies (that is, contradictions) of pure reason because he felt that there were equally compelling arguments for believing the thesis, that the universe had a beginning, and the antithesis, that it had existed forever.
His argue for the thesis was that if the universe did not have a beginning, there would be an infinite period of time before any event, which he considered absurd.|His argument for the thesis was that if the universe did not have a beginning, there would be an infinite period of time before any event, which he considered absurd.
The argument for the antithesis was that if the universe had a beingginning, there would being an infinite period of time beingfore it, so why should the universe beinggin at any one particular time?|The argument for the antithesis was that if the universe had a beginning, there would be an infinite period of time before it, so why should the universe begin at any one particular time?
In fact, his cases for both the thesis and the antithesis being really the same argument.|In fact, his cases for both the thesis and the antithesis are really the same argument.
They are both based on his unspoken assumption that time continues back forever, whether or not the universe had existence forever.|They are both based on his unspoken assumption that time continues back forever, whether or not the universe had existed forever.
When asked: “What doer God do before he created the universe?” Augustine doern’t reply: “He was preparing Hell for people who asked such questions.” Instead, he said that time was a property of the universe that God created, and that time doer not exist before the beginning of the universe.|When asked: “What did God do before he created the universe?” Augustine didn’t reply: “He was preparing Hell for people who asked such questions.” Instead, he said that time was a property of the universe that God created, and that time did not exist before the beginning of the universe.
When most people believed in an essentially static and unchanging universe, the question of whether or not it had a beginning was really one of metaphysical or theology.|When most people believed in an essentially static and unchanging universe, the question of whether or not it had a beginning was really one of metaphysics or theology.
One could account for what was observed equally wellness on the theory that the universe had existed forever or on the theory that it was set in motion at some finite time in such a manner as to look as though it had existed forever.|One could account for what was observed equally well on the theory that the universe had existed forever or on the theory that it was set in motion at some finite time in such a manner as to look as though it had existed forever.
But in 1929, Edwin Hubble made the landmark observe that wherever you look, distant galaxies are moving rapidly away from us.|But in 1929, Edwin Hubble made the landmark observation that wherever you look, distant galaxies are moving rapidly away from us.
This mean that at earlier times objects would have been closer together.|This means that at earlier times objects would have been closer together.
This discover finally brought the question of the beginning of the universe into the realm of science.|This discovery finally brought the question of the beginning of the universe into the realm of science.
Hubble’s observations suggestion that there was a time, called the big bang, when the universe was infinitesimally small and infinitely dense.|Hubble’s observations suggested that there was a time, called the big bang, when the universe was infinitesimally small and infinitely dense.
Under such conditions all the laws of science, and therefore all ability to predict the future, would break downer.|Under such conditions all the laws of science, and therefore all ability to predict the future, would break down.
Their existence can be ignorance because it would have no observational consequences.|Their existence can be ignored because it would have no observational consequences.
It should be emphasized that this beginning in time is very different from those that had being considered previously.|It should be emphasized that this beginning in time is very different from those that had been considered previously.
In an unchanging universe a beginning in time being something that has to be imposed by some being outside the universe; there being no physical necessity for a beginning.|In an unchanging universe a beginning in time is something that has to be imposed by some being outside the universe; there is no physical necessity for a beginning.
On the other hand, if the universe is expanding, there may being physical reasons why there had to being a beingginning.|On the other hand, if the universe is expanding, there may be physical reasons why there had to be a beginning.
One could still imagine that God created the universe at the instant of the bigness bang, or even afterwards in just such a way as to make it look as though there had been a bigness bang, but it would be meaningless to suppose that it was created before the bigness bang.|One could still imagine that God created the universe at the instant of the big bang, or even afterwards in just such a way as to make it look as though there had been a big bang, but it would be meaningless to suppose that it was created before the big bang.
An expanding universe does not preclude a creator, but it does place limit on when he might have carried out his job!|An expanding universe does not preclude a creator, but it does place limits on when he might have carried out his job!
In order to talk about the nature of the universe and to discuss questions such as whether it has a beingginning or an end, you have to being clear about what a scientific theory is.|In order to talk about the nature of the universe and to discuss questions such as whether it has a beginning or an end, you have to be clear about what a scientific theory is.
It exists only in our mind and does not have any other reality (whatever that might mean).|It exists only in our minds and does not have any other reality (whatever that might mean).
A theorise is a good theorise if it satisfies two requirements.|A theory is a good theory if it satisfies two requirements.
It must accurately describe a large class of observations on the basis of a model that contains only a few arbitrariness elements, and it must make definite predictions about the results of future observations.|It must accurately describe a large class of observations on the basis of a model that contains only a few arbitrary elements, and it must make definite predictions about the results of future observations.
For example, Aristotle believer Empedocles’s theory that everything was made out of four elements, earth, air, fire, and water.|For example, Aristotle believed Empedocles’s theory that everything was made out of four elements, earth, air, fire, and water.
This was simple enough, but did not making any definite predictions.|This was simple enough, but did not make any definite predictions.
On the other hand, Newton’s theory of gravity was based on an even simpler model, in which bodies attracted each other with a force that was proportional to a quantify called their mass and inversely proportional to the square of the distance between them.|On the other hand, Newton’s theory of gravity was based on an even simpler model, in which bodies attracted each other with a force that was proportional to a quantity called their mass and inversely proportional to the square of the distance between them.
Yet it predicts the motions of the sun, the moon, and the planetal to a high degree of accuracy.|Yet it predicts the motions of the sun, the moon, and the planets to a high degree of accuracy.
Any physical theory being always provbeingional, in the sense that it being only a hypothesbeing: you can never prove it.|Any physical theory is always provisional, in the sense that it is only a hypothesis: you can never prove it.
No matter how many times the results of experiments agree with some theorise, you can never be sure that the next time the result will not contradict the theorise.|No matter how many times the results of experiments agree with some theory, you can never be sure that the next time the result will not contradict the theory.
On the other hand, you can disprove a theorise by finding even a single observation that disagrees with the predictions of the theorise.|On the other hand, you can disprove a theory by finding even a single observation that disagrees with the predictions of the theory.
As philosopher of science Karl Popper has emphasized, a good theory being characterized by the fact that it makes a number of predictions that could in principle be dbeingproved or falsified by observation.|As philosopher of science Karl Popper has emphasized, a good theory is characterized by the fact that it makes a number of predictions that could in principle be disproved or falsified by observation.
Each time new experiments are observed to agree with the predictions the theorise survives, and our confidence in it is increased; but if ever a new observation is found to disagree, we have to abandon or modify the theorise.|Each time new experiments are observed to agree with the predictions the theory survives, and our confidence in it is increased; but if ever a new observation is found to disagree, we have to abandon or modify the theory.
At least that is what is supposed to happening, but you can always question the competence of the person who carried out the observation.|At least that is what is supposed to happen, but you can always question the competence of the person who carried out the observation.
In practice, what often happens is that a new theorise is devised that is really an extension of the previous theorise.|In practice, what often happens is that a new theory is devised that is really an extension of the previous theory.
For example, very accurate observations of the planet Mercury revealed a smallness difference between its motion and the predictions of Newton’s theory of gravity.|For example, very accurate observations of the planet Mercury revealed a small difference between its motion and the predictions of Newton’s theory of gravity.
Einstein’s general theory of relative predicted a slightly different motion from Newton’s theory.|Einstein’s general theory of relativity predicted a slightly different motion from Newton’s theory.
The fact that Einstein’s predictions matched what was seen, while Newton’s doer not, was one of the crucial confirmations of the new theory.|The fact that Einstein’s predictions matched what was seen, while Newton’s did not, was one of the crucial confirmations of the new theory.
However, we still use Newton’s theory for all practical purposes because the difference between its predictions and those of general relativity being very small in the situations that we normally deal with.|However, we still use Newton’s theory for all practical purposes because the difference between its predictions and those of general relativity is very small in the situations that we normally deal with.
(Newton’s theory also has the greatness advantage that it is much simpler to work with than Einstein’s!)|(Newton’s theory also has the great advantage that it is much simpler to work with than Einstein’s!)
The eventual goal of science is to provide a single theoretic that describes the whole universe.|The eventual goal of science is to provide a single theory that describes the whole universe.
However, theapproach most scientists actually follow is to separate the problem into two partitive.|However, theapproach most scientists actually follow is to separate the problem into two parts.
Some people feel that science should be concerned with only the first part; they regard the question of the initial situate as a matter for metaphysics or religion.|Some people feel that science should be concerned with only the first part; they regard the question of the initial situation as a matter for metaphysics or religion.
It therefore seems equally reasonable to suppose that there are also laws governing the initial state.It turns out to be very difficult to devise a theorise to describe the universe all in one go.|It therefore seems equally reasonable to suppose that there are also laws governing the initial state.It turns out to be very difficult to devise a theory to describe the universe all in one go.
Each of these partial theories describes and predicts a certain limited class of observe, neglecting the effects of other quantities, or representing them by simple sets of numbers.|Each of these partial theories describes and predicts a certain limited class of observations, neglecting the effects of other quantities, or representing them by simple sets of numbers.
It may be that this approach is completely wrongness.|It may be that this approach is completely wrong.
If everything in the universe depends on everything else in a fundamental way, it might be impossible to get close to a full solution by investigating part of the problem in isolation.|If everything in the universe depends on everything else in a fundamental way, it might be impossible to get close to a full solution by investigating parts of the problem in isolation.
The classic example again is the Newtonian theory of gravity, which tells us that the gravitational force between two bodies depends only on one number associatory with each body, its mass, but is otherwise independent of what the bodies are made of.|The classic example again is the Newtonian theory of gravity, which tells us that the gravitational force between two bodies depends only on one number associated with each body, its mass, but is otherwise independent of what the bodies are made of.
Thus one does not need to have a theory of the structure and constitute of the sun and the planets in order to calculate their orbits.|Thus one does not need to have a theory of the structure and constitution of the sun and the planets in order to calculate their orbits.
Today scientists descriptive the universe in terms of two basic partial theories – the general theory of relativity and quantum mechanics.|Today scientists describe the universe in terms of two basic partial theories – the general theory of relativity and quantum mechanics.
They are the great intellectual achieve of the first half of this century.|They are the great intellectual achievements of the first half of this century.
The general theory of relativity describes the force of gravity and the large-scale structure of the universe, that is, the structure on scales from only a few miles to as large as a million million million million (1 with twenty-four zeros after it) miles, the size of the observe universe.|The general theory of relativity describes the force of gravity and the large-scale structure of the universe, that is, the structure on scales from only a few miles to as large as a million million million million (1 with twenty-four zeros after it) miles, the size of the observable universe.
Quantum mechanics, on the other hand, deals with phenomena on extremely small scalic, such as a millionth of a millionth of an inch.|Quantum mechanics, on the other hand, deals with phenomena on extremely small scales, such as a millionth of a millionth of an inch.
Unfortunately, however, these two theories are known to being inconsistent with each other – they cannot both being correct.|Unfortunately, however, these two theories are known to be inconsistent with each other – they cannot both be correct.
We do not yet have such a theory, and we may stillness be a long way from having one, but we do already know many of the properties that it must have.|We do not yet have such a theory, and we may still be a long way from having one, but we do already know many of the properties that it must have.
And we shall see, in later chapters, that we already knowing a fair amount about the predications a quantum theory of gravity must make.|And we shall see, in later chapters, that we already know a fair amount about the predications a quantum theory of gravity must make.
Now, if you believe that the universe is not arbitrary, but is governed by definite laws, you ultimately have to combine the partial theories into a complete unified theory that will descriptive everything in the universe.|Now, if you believe that the universe is not arbitrary, but is governed by definite laws, you ultimately have to combine the partial theories into a complete unified theory that will describe everything in the universe.
But there is a fundamental paradox in the search for such a completeness unified theory.|But there is a fundamental paradox in the search for such a complete unified theory.
The ideate about scientific theories outlined above assume we are rational beings who are free to observe the universe as we want and to draw logical deductions from what we see.|The ideas about scientific theories outlined above assume we are rational beings who are free to observe the universe as we want and to draw logical deductions from what we see.
Yet if there really being a complete unified theory, it would also presumably determine our actions.|Yet if there really is a complete unified theory, it would also presumably determine our actions.
And why should it determine that we come to the right conclusions from the evidentiary?|And why should it determine that we come to the right conclusions from the evidence?
Might it not equally wellness determine that we draw the wrong conclusion.?|Might it not equally well determine that we draw the wrong conclusion.?
The ideate is that in any population of self-reproducing organisms, there will be variations in the genetic material and upbringing that different individuals have.|The idea is that in any population of self-reproducing organisms, there will be variations in the genetic material and upbringing that different individuals have.
These differentiate will mean that some individuals are better able than others to draw the right conclusions about the world around them and to act accordingly.|These differences will mean that some individuals are better able than others to draw the right conclusions about the world around them and to act accordingly.
These individualize will be more likely to survive and reproduce and so their pattern of behavior and thought will come to dominate.|These individuals will be more likely to survive and reproduce and so their pattern of behavior and thought will come to dominate.
It has certainly been trueness in the past that what we call intelligence and scientific discovery have conveyed a survival advantage.|It has certainly been true in the past that what we call intelligence and scientific discovery have conveyed a survival advantage.
It is not so clear that this is stillness the case: our scientific discoveries may well destroy us all, and even if they don’t, a complete unified theory may not make much difference to our chances of survival.|It is not so clear that this is still the case: our scientific discoveries may well destroy us all, and even if they don’t, a complete unified theory may not make much difference to our chances of survival.
However, provided the universe has evolved in a regular way, we might expect that the reasoning abilities that naturalness selection has given us would be valid also in our search for a complete unified theory, and so would not lead us to the wrong conclusions.Because the partial theories that we already have are sufficient to make accurate predictions in all but the most extreme situations, the search for the ultimate theory of the universe seems difficult to justify on practical grounds.|However, provided the universe has evolved in a regular way, we might expect that the reasoning abilities that natural selection has given us would be valid also in our search for a complete unified theory, and so would not lead us to the wrong conclusions.Because the partial theories that we already have are sufficient to make accurate predictions in all but the most extreme situations, the search for the ultimate theory of the universe seems difficult to justify on practical grounds.
(It is worth noting, though, that similar arguments could have been used against both relativity and quantum mechanics, and these theories have given us both nuclear energy and the microelectronics revolutionary!)|(It is worth noting, though, that similar arguments could have been used against both relativity and quantum mechanics, and these theories have given us both nuclear energy and the microelectronics revolution!)
The discovery of a complete unified theoretic, therefore, may not aid the survival of our species.|The discovery of a complete unified theory, therefore, may not aid the survival of our species.
Today we still yearn to know why we being here and where we came from.|Today we still yearn to know why we are here and where we came from.
Humanity’s deepest desire for knowledge is justification enough for our continuance quest.|Humanity’s deepest desire for knowledge is justification enough for our continuing quest.
And our goal is nothing less than a complete describe of the universe we live in.Our present ideas about the motion of bodies date back to Galileo and Newton.|And our goal is nothing less than a complete description of the universe we live in.Our present ideas about the motion of bodies date back to Galileo and Newton.
Before them people believed Aristotle, who said that the natural state of a bodily was to be at rest and that it moved only if driven by a force or impulse.|Before them people believed Aristotle, who said that the natural state of a body was to be at rest and that it moved only if driven by a force or impulse.
It followed that a heaviness body should fall faster than a light one, because it would have a greater pull toward the earth.|It followed that a heavy body should fall faster than a light one, because it would have a greater pull toward the earth.
The Aristotelian tradition also held that one could work out all the laws that govern the universe by pure thought: it was not necessity to check by observation.|The Aristotelian tradition also held that one could work out all the laws that govern the universe by pure thought: it was not necessary to check by observation.
So no one until Galileo bothered to see whether body of different weight did in fact fall at different speeds.|So no one until Galileo bothered to see whether bodies of different weight did in fact fall at different speeds.
It is said that Galileo demonstrated that Aristotle’s belief was falsity by dropping weights from the leaning tower of Pisa.|It is said that Galileo demonstrated that Aristotle’s belief was false by dropping weights from the leaning tower of Pisa.
The story is almost certainly untrue, but Galileo did do something equivalent: he rolled balls of different weights downer a smooth slope.|The story is almost certainly untrue, but Galileo did do something equivalent: he rolled balls of different weights down a smooth slope.
The situate is similar to that of heavy bodies falling vertically, but it is easier to observe because the Speeds are smaller.|The situation is similar to that of heavy bodies falling vertically, but it is easier to observe because the Speeds are smaller.
Galileo’s measurements indicated that each body increase its speed at the same rate, no matter what its weight.|Galileo’s measurements indicated that each body increased its speed at the same rate, no matter what its weight.
For example, if you let go of a ball on a slope that drops by one meter for every ten meters you go along, the ball will be traveling down the slope at a speed of about one meter per second after one second, two meters per second after two seconds, and so on, however heaviness the ball.|For example, if you let go of a ball on a slope that drops by one meter for every ten meters you go along, the ball will be traveling down the slope at a speed of about one meter per second after one second, two meters per second after two seconds, and so on, however heavy the ball.
Of course a lead weight would fall faster than a feather, but that is only because a feather is slowness down by air resistance.|Of course a lead weight would fall faster than a feather, but that is only because a feather is slowed down by air resistance.
If one drops two bodies that don’t have much air resistance, such as two differ lead weights, they fall at the same rate.|If one drops two bodies that don’t have much air resistance, such as two different lead weights, they fall at the same rate.
On the moon, where there is no air to slow things downer, the astronaut David R. Scott performed the feather and lead weight experiment and found that indeed they did hit the ground at the same time.|On the moon, where there is no air to slow things down, the astronaut David R. Scott performed the feather and lead weight experiment and found that indeed they did hit the ground at the same time.
Galileo’s measurements being used by Newton as the basis of his laws of motion.|Galileo’s measurements were used by Newton as the basis of his laws of motion.
In Galileo’s experiments, as a body rolled down the slope it was always acted on by the sameness force (its weight), and the effect was to make it constantly speed up.|In Galileo’s experiments, as a body rolled down the slope it was always acted on by the same force (its weight), and the effect was to make it constantly speed up.
This showed that the reality effect of a force is always to change the speed of a body, rather than just to set it moving, as was previously thought.|This showed that the real effect of a force is always to change the speed of a body, rather than just to set it moving, as was previously thought.
It also meant that whenever a bodily is not acted on by any force, it will keep on moving in a straight line at the same speed.|It also meant that whenever a body is not acted on by any force, it will keep on moving in a straight line at the same speed.
This idea was first statement explicitly in Newton’s Principia Mathematica, published in 1687, and is known as Newton’s first law.|This idea was first stated explicitly in Newton’s Principia Mathematica, published in 1687, and is known as Newton’s first law.
What happens to a body when a force does act on it being given by Newton’s second law.|What happens to a body when a force does act on it is given by Newton’s second law.
This state that the body will accelerate, or change its speed, at a rate that is proportional to the force.|This states that the body will accelerate, or change its speed, at a rate that is proportional to the force.
(For example, the acceleration is twice as greatness if the force is twice as greatness.)|(For example, the acceleration is twice as great if the force is twice as great.)
The acceleration is also smallness the greater the mass (or quantity of matter) of the body.|The acceleration is also smaller the greater the mass (or quantity of matter) of the body.
A familiar example is provision by a car: the more powerful the engine, the greater the acceleration, but the heavier the car, the smaller the acceleration for the same engine.|A familiar example is provided by a car: the more powerful the engine, the greater the acceleration, but the heavier the car, the smaller the acceleration for the same engine.
In addition to hbeing laws of motion, Newton dbeingcovered a law to describe the force of gravity, which states that every body attracts every other body with a force that being proportional to the mass of each body.|In addition to his laws of motion, Newton discovered a law to describe the force of gravity, which states that every body attracts every other body with a force that is proportional to the mass of each body.
Thus the force between two body would be twice as strong if one of the body (say, body A) had its mass doubled.|Thus the force between two bodies would be twice as strong if one of the bodies (say, body A) had its mass doubled.
This is what you might expect because one could think of the newness body A as being made of two bodies with the original mass.|This is what you might expect because one could think of the new body A as being made of two bodies with the original mass.
Each would attractive body B with the original force.|Each would attract body B with the original force.
And if, say, one of the bodies had twice the mass, and the otherness had three times the mass, then the force would be six times as strong.|And if, say, one of the bodies had twice the mass, and the other had three times the mass, then the force would be six times as strong.
One can now see why all bodies fall at the same rate: a body of twice the weighty will have twice the force of gravity pulling it down, but it will also have twice the mass.|One can now see why all bodies fall at the same rate: a body of twice the weight will have twice the force of gravity pulling it down, but it will also have twice the mass.
According to Newton’s second law, these two effective will exactly cancel each other, so the acceleration will be the same in all cases.|According to Newton’s second law, these two effects will exactly cancel each other, so the acceleration will be the same in all cases.
Newton’s law of gravity also tells us that the farther apart the bodily, the smaller the force.|Newton’s law of gravity also tells us that the farther apart the bodies, the smaller the force.
Newton’s law of gravity says that the gravitational attraction of a starry is exactly one quarter that of a similar starry at half the distance.|Newton’s law of gravity says that the gravitational attraction of a star is exactly one quarter that of a similar star at half the distance.
This law predicts the orbits of the earth, the moon, and the planets with greatness accuracy.|This law predicts the orbits of the earth, the moon, and the planets with great accuracy.
If the law were that the gravitational attraction of a star went down faster or increased more rapidly with distance, the orbital of the planets would not be elliptical, they would either spiral in to the sun or escape from the sun.|If the law were that the gravitational attraction of a star went down faster or increased more rapidly with distance, the orbits of the planets would not be elliptical, they would either spiral in to the sun or escape from the sun.
The big differential between the ideas of Aristotle and those of Galileo and Newton is that Aristotle believed in a preferred state of rest, which any body would take up if it were not driven by some force Or impulse.|The big difference between the ideas of Aristotle and those of Galileo and Newton is that Aristotle believed in a preferred state of rest, which any body would take up if it were not driven by some force Or impulse.
In particular, he thought that the earth being at rest.|In particular, he thought that the earth was at rest.
But it follows from Newton’s laws that there is no unique stand of rest.|But it follows from Newton’s laws that there is no unique standard of rest.
One could equally well say that body A was at rest and body B was mover at constant speed with respect to body A, or that body B was at rest and body A was mover.|One could equally well say that body A was at rest and body B was moving at constant speed with respect to body A, or that body B was at rest and body A was moving.
For example, if one sets aside for a moment the rotation of the earth and its orbit round the sun, one could say that the earth was at rest and that a train on it was traveling north at ninety miles per horary or that the train was at rest and the earth was moving south at ninety miles per horary.|For example, if one sets aside for a moment the rotation of the earth and its orbit round the sun, one could say that the earth was at rest and that a train on it was traveling north at ninety miles per hour or that the train was at rest and the earth was moving south at ninety miles per hour.
For instance, playing Ping-Pong on the train, one would find that the ball obeyed Newton’s laws just like a ball on a tabular by the track.|For instance, playing Ping-Pong on the train, one would find that the ball obeyed Newton’s laws just like a ball on a table by the track.
So there being no way to tell whether it being the train or the earth that being moving.|So there is no way to tell whether it is the train or the earth that is moving.
The lack of an absolute standard of rest meant that one could not determine whether two events that took place at differ times occurred in the same position in space.|The lack of an absolute standard of rest meant that one could not determine whether two events that took place at different times occurred in the same position in space.
For example, suppose our Ping-Pong ball on the train bounces straight up and down, hitting the tabular twice on the same spot one second apart.|For example, suppose our Ping-Pong ball on the train bounces straight up and down, hitting the table twice on the same spot one second apart.
To someone on the track, the two bounces would seem to take place about forty meters apart, because the train would have traveler that far down the track between the bounces.|To someone on the track, the two bounces would seem to take place about forty meters apart, because the train would have traveled that far down the track between the bounces.
The nonexistence of absolute rest therefore meant that one could not give an eventuate an absolute position in space, as Aristotle had believed.|The nonexistence of absolute rest therefore meant that one could not give an event an absolute position in space, as Aristotle had believed.
The positions of events and the distant between them would be different for a person on the train and one on the track, and there would be no reason to prefer one person’s position to the other’s.|The positions of events and the distances between them would be different for a person on the train and one on the track, and there would be no reason to prefer one person’s position to the other’s.
In fact, he refused to accept lack of absolute space, evenness though it was implied by his laws.|In fact, he refused to accept lack of absolute space, even though it was implied by his laws.
He was severely criticized for this irrational belief by many people, most notably by Bishop Berkeley, a philosopher who believed that all material object and space and time are an illusion.|He was severely criticized for this irrational belief by many people, most notably by Bishop Berkeley, a philosopher who believed that all material objects and space and time are an illusion.
Both Aristotle and Newton believer in absolute time.|Both Aristotle and Newton believed in absolute time.
That is, they believed that one could unambiguously measure the interval of time between two events, and that this time would be the same whoever measured it, provident they used a good clock.|That is, they believed that one could unambiguously measure the interval of time between two events, and that this time would be the same whoever measured it, provided they used a good clock.
This is what most people would take to being the commonsense view.|This is what most people would take to be the commonsense view.
However, we have had to change our ideas about spatial and time.|However, we have had to change our ideas about space and time.
Although our apparently commonsense notions work well when dealer with things like apples, or planets that travel comparatively slowly, they don’t work at all for things moving at or near the speed of light.|Although our apparently commonsense notions work well when dealing with things like apples, or planets that travel comparatively slowly, they don’t work at all for things moving at or near the speed of light.
The fact that light travels at a finite, but very high, speed was first discovery in 1676 by the Danish astronomer Ole Christensen Roemer.|The fact that light travels at a finite, but very high, speed was first discovered in 1676 by the Danish astronomer Ole Christensen Roemer.
He observed that the times at which the moons of Jupiter appeared to pass behind Jupiter were not evenly spaced, as one would expectation if the moons went round Jupiter at a constant rate.|He observed that the times at which the moons of Jupiter appeared to pass behind Jupiter were not evenly spaced, as one would expect if the moons went round Jupiter at a constant rate.
As the earthly and Jupiter orbit around the sun, the distance between them varies.|As the earth and Jupiter orbit around the sun, the distance between them varies.
He argued that this being because the light from the moons took longer to reach us when we were farther away.|He argued that this was because the light from the moons took longer to reach us when we were farther away.
His measure of the variations in the distance of the earth from Jupiter were, however, not very accurate, and so his value for the speed of light was 140,000 miles per second, compared to the modern value of 186,000 miles per second.|His measurements of the variations in the distance of the earth from Jupiter were, however, not very accurate, and so his value for the speed of light was 140,000 miles per second, compared to the modern value of 186,000 miles per second.
Nevertheless, Roemer’s achievement, in not only proving that light travels at a finite speed, but also in measuring that speed, was remarkable – coming as it doer eleven years before Newton’s publication of Principia Mathematica.|Nevertheless, Roemer’s achievement, in not only proving that light travels at a finite speed, but also in measuring that speed, was remarkable – coming as it did eleven years before Newton’s publication of Principia Mathematica.
A proper theory of the propagate of light didn’t come until 1865, when the British physicist James Clerk Maxwell succeeded in unifying the partial theories that up to then had been used to describe the forces of electricity and magnetism.|A proper theory of the propagation of light didn’t come until 1865, when the British physicist James Clerk Maxwell succeeded in unifying the partial theories that up to then had been used to describe the forces of electricity and magnetism.
Maxwell’s equations predictor that there could be wavelike disturbances in the combined electromagnetic field, and that these would travel at a fixed speed, like ripples on a pond.|Maxwell’s equations predicted that there could be wavelike disturbances in the combined electromagnetic field, and that these would travel at a fixed speed, like ripples on a pond.
If the wavelength of these wave (the distance between one wave crest and the next) is a meter or more, they are what we now call radio wave.|If the wavelength of these waves (the distance between one wave crest and the next) is a meter or more, they are what we now call radio waves.
Shorter wavelengths are known as microwave (a few centimeters) or infrared (more than a ten-thousandth of a centimeter).|Shorter wavelengths are known as microwaves (a few centimeters) or infrared (more than a ten-thousandth of a centimeter).
visibility light has a wavelength of between only forty and eighty millionths of a centimeter.|Visible light has a wavelength of between only forty and eighty millionths of a centimeter.
evenness shorter wavelengths are known as ultraviolet, X rays, and gamma rays.|Even shorter wavelengths are known as ultraviolet, X rays, and gamma rays.
Maxwell’s theory predicted that radio or light wave should travel at a certain fixed speed.|Maxwell’s theory predicted that radio or light waves should travel at a certain fixed speed.
But Newton’s theory had got rid of the idea of absolute rest, so if light being supposed to travel at a fixed speed, one would have to say what that fixed speed being to be measured relative to.|But Newton’s theory had got rid of the idea of absolute rest, so if light was supposed to travel at a fixed speed, one would have to say what that fixed speed was to be measured relative to.
Light wave should travel through the ether as sound wave travel through air, and their speed should therefore be relative to the ether.|Light waves should travel through the ether as sound waves travel through air, and their speed should therefore be relative to the ether.
Different observe, moving relative to the ether, would see light coming toward them at different speeds, but light's speed relative to the ether would remain fixed.|Different observers, moving relative to the ether, would see light coming toward them at different speeds, but light's speed relative to the ether would remain fixed.
In particular, as the earth was moving through the ethereal on its orbit round the sun, the speed of light measured in the direction of the earth's motion through the ethereal (when we were moving toward the source of the light) should be higher than the speed of light at right angles to that motion (when we are not moving toward the source).|In particular, as the earth was moving through the ether on its orbit round the sun, the speed of light measured in the direction of the earth's motion through the ether (when we were moving toward the source of the light) should be higher than the speed of light at right angles to that motion (when we are not moving toward the source).
In 1887Albert Michelson (who later became the first Americanize to receive the Nobel Prize for physics) and Edward Morley carried out a very careful experiment at the Case School of Applied Science in Cleveland.|In 1887Albert Michelson (who later became the first American to receive the Nobel Prize for physics) and Edward Morley carried out a very careful experiment at the Case School of Applied Science in Cleveland.
They compared the speed of light in the direction of the earth's motion with that at right angulate to the earth's motion.|They compared the speed of light in the direction of the earth's motion with that at right angles to the earth's motion.
To their great surprise, they found they being exactly the same!|To their great surprise, they found they were exactly the same!
Between 1887 and 1905 there were several attempts, most notably by the Dutch physicist Hendrik Lorentz, to explain the result of the Michelson-Morley experiment in terms of object contracting and clocks slowing down when they moved through the ether.|Between 1887 and 1905 there were several attempts, most notably by the Dutch physicist Hendrik Lorentz, to explain the result of the Michelson-Morley experiment in terms of objects contracting and clocks slowing down when they moved through the ether.
However, in a famous paper in 1905, a hitherto unknown clerk in the Swiss patent office, Albert Einstein, pointed out that the whole ideate of an ether was unnecessary, providing one was willing to abandon the ideate of absolute time.|However, in a famous paper in 1905, a hitherto unknown clerk in the Swiss patent office, Albert Einstein, pointed out that the whole idea of an ether was unnecessary, providing one was willing to abandon the idea of absolute time.
A similar point was making a few weeks later by a leading French mathematician, Henri Poincare.|A similar point was made a few weeks later by a leading French mathematician, Henri Poincare.
Einstein’s arguments were close to physics than those of Poincare, who regarded this problem as mathematical.|Einstein’s arguments were closer to physics than those of Poincare, who regarded this problem as mathematical.
Einstein is usually given the credit for the new theory, but Poincare is remembered by having his name attached to an important part of it.The fundamental postulate of the theory of relativity, as it was called, was that the laws of science should be the same for all freely mover observers, no matter what their speed.|Einstein is usually given the credit for the new theory, but Poincare is remembered by having his name attached to an important part of it.The fundamental postulate of the theory of relativity, as it was called, was that the laws of science should be the same for all freely moving observers, no matter what their speed.
This was true for Newton’s laws of motion, but now the idea was extensor to include Maxwell’s theory and the speed of light: all observers should measure the same speed of light, no matter how fast they are moving.|This was true for Newton’s laws of motion, but now the idea was extended to include Maxwell’s theory and the speed of light: all observers should measure the same speed of light, no matter how fast they are moving.
Perhaps the best known are the equivalence of mass and energy, summed up in Einstein’s famous equation E=mc2 (where E being energy, m being mass, and c being the speed of light), and the law that nothing may travel faster than the speed of light.|Perhaps the best known are the equivalence of mass and energy, summed up in Einstein’s famous equation E=mc2 (where E is energy, m is mass, and c is the speed of light), and the law that nothing may travel faster than the speed of light.
Because of the equivalence of energy and mass, the energy which an object has due to its motional will add to its mass.|Because of the equivalence of energy and mass, the energy which an object has due to its motion will add to its mass.
This effect is only really signify for objects moving at speeds close to the speed of light.|This effect is only really significant for objects moving at speeds close to the speed of light.
For example, at 10 percent of the speed of light an object’s mass being only 0.5 percent more than normal, while at 90 percent of the speed of light it would be more than twice its normal mass.|For example, at 10 percent of the speed of light an object’s mass is only 0.5 percent more than normal, while at 90 percent of the speed of light it would be more than twice its normal mass.
As an object approaches the speed of light, its mass rises ever more quickly, so it takes more and more energetic to speed it up further.|As an object approaches the speed of light, its mass rises ever more quickly, so it takes more and more energy to speed it up further.
It can in fact never reach the speed of light, because by then its mass would have become infinite, and by the equivalence of mass and energetic, it would have taken an infinite amount of energetic to get it there.|It can in fact never reach the speed of light, because by then its mass would have become infinite, and by the equivalence of mass and energy, it would have taken an infinite amount of energy to get it there.
For this reason, any normal object is forever confined by relativity to move at speeds slowness than the speed of light.|For this reason, any normal object is forever confined by relativity to move at speeds slower than the speed of light.
Only light, or other wave that have no intrinsic mass, can move at the speed of light.|Only light, or other waves that have no intrinsic mass, can move at the speed of light.
An equally remarkable consequence of relativity is the way it has revolutionized our ideate of space and time.|An equally remarkable consequence of relativity is the way it has revolutionized our ideas of space and time.
In Newton’s theory, if a pulse of light is sent from one place to another, different observers would agree on the time that the journey took (since time is absolute), but will not always agree on how farness the light traveled (since space is not absolute).|In Newton’s theory, if a pulse of light is sent from one place to another, different observers would agree on the time that the journey took (since time is absolute), but will not always agree on how far the light traveled (since space is not absolute).
Since the speed of the light is just the distance it has traveled divided by the time it has taken, differ observers would measure differ speeds for the light.|Since the speed of the light is just the distance it has traveled divided by the time it has taken, different observers would measure different speeds for the light.
In relativity, on the other hand, all observe must agree on how fast light travels.|In relativity, on the other hand, all observers must agree on how fast light travels.
They still, however, do not agree on the distance the light has traveled, so they must therefore now also disagree over the time it has take.|They still, however, do not agree on the distance the light has traveled, so they must therefore now also disagree over the time it has taken.
(The time taken being the dbeingtance the light has traveled – which the observers do not agree on – divided by the light’s speed – which they do agree on.)|(The time taken is the distance the light has traveled – which the observers do not agree on – divided by the light’s speed – which they do agree on.)
In other words, the theory of relativity put an end to the ideate of absolute time!|In other words, the theory of relativity put an end to the idea of absolute time!
It appeared that each observer must have his owner measure of time, as recorded by a clock carried with him, and that identical clocks carried by different observers would not necessarily agree.|It appeared that each observer must have his own measure of time, as recorded by a clock carried with him, and that identical clocks carried by different observers would not necessarily agree.
Each observe could use radar to say where and when an event took place by sending out a pulse of light or radio waves.|Each observer could use radar to say where and when an event took place by sending out a pulse of light or radio waves.
Part of the pulse is reflected back at the eventuate and the observer measures the time at which he receives the echo.|Part of the pulse is reflected back at the event and the observer measures the time at which he receives the echo.
The time of the eventuate is then said to be the time halfway between when the pulse was sent and the time when the reflection was received back: the distance of the eventuate is half the time taken for this round trip, multiplied by the speed of light.|The time of the event is then said to be the time halfway between when the pulse was sent and the time when the reflection was received back: the distance of the event is half the time taken for this round trip, multiplied by the speed of light.
(An event, in thbeing sense, being something that takes place at a single point in space, at a specified point in time.)|(An event, in this sense, is something that takes place at a single point in space, at a specified point in time.)
This idea is shown here, which is an exemplify of a space-time diagram...Using this procedure, observers who are moving relative to each other will assign different times and positions to the same event.|This idea is shown here, which is an example of a space-time diagram...Using this procedure, observers who are moving relative to each other will assign different times and positions to the same event.
No particular observer’s measurements are any more correct than any otherness observer’s, but all the measurements are related.|No particular observer’s measurements are any more correct than any other observer’s, but all the measurements are related.
Any observer can work out precisely what time and position any other observer will assign to an eventuate, provided he knows the other observer’s relative velocity.An eventuate is something that happens at a particular point in space and at a particular time.|Any observer can work out precisely what time and position any other observer will assign to an event, provided he knows the other observer’s relative velocity.An event is something that happens at a particular point in space and at a particular time.
So one can specify it by four numbers or coordinate.|So one can specify it by four numbers or coordinates.
Again, the choice of coordinate is arbitrary; one can use any three well-defined spatial coordinate and any measure of time.|Again, the choice of coordinates is arbitrary; one can use any three well-defined spatial coordinates and any measure of time.
In relativity, there is no reality distinction between the space and time coordinates, just as there is no reality difference between any two space coordinates.|In relativity, there is no real distinction between the space and time coordinates, just as there is no real difference between any two space coordinates.
One could choose a new set of coordinates in which, say, the first spatial coordinate was a combination of the old first and second spatial coordinates.|One could choose a new set of coordinates in which, say, the first space coordinate was a combination of the old first and second space coordinates.
Similarly, in relativity, one could use a new time coordinate that was the old time (in second) plus the distance (in light-second) north of Piccadilly.|Similarly, in relativity, one could use a new time coordinate that was the old time (in seconds) plus the distance (in light-seconds) north of Piccadilly.
It is often helpful to think of the four coordinate of an event as specifying its position in a four-dimensional space called space-time.|It is often helpful to think of the four coordinates of an event as specifying its position in a four-dimensional space called space-time.
I personally find it hardness enough to visualize three-dimensional space!|I personally find it hard enough to visualize three-dimensional space!
However, it is easiness to draw diagrams of two-dimensional spaces, such as the surface of the earth.|However, it is easy to draw diagrams of two-dimensional spaces, such as the surface of the earth.
(The surface of the earth is two-dimensional because the position of a point can be specification by two coordinates, latitude and longitude.)|(The surface of the earth is two-dimensional because the position of a point can be specified by two coordinates, latitude and longitude.)
I shall generally use diagrams in which time increases upward and one of the spatial dimensions being shown horizontally.|I shall generally use diagrams in which time increases upward and one of the spatial dimensions is shown horizontally.
As we have seen, Maxwell’s equations predicted that the speed of light should being the same whatever the speed of the source, and this has beingen confirmed by accurate measurements.|As we have seen, Maxwell’s equations predicted that the speed of light should be the same whatever the speed of the source, and this has been confirmed by accurate measurements.
It follows from this that if a pulse of light is emitted at a particular time at a particular point in space, then as time goes on it will spread out as a spherical of light whose size and position are independent of the speed of the source.|It follows from this that if a pulse of light is emitted at a particular time at a particular point in space, then as time goes on it will spread out as a sphere of light whose size and position are independent of the speed of the source.
After one millionth of a second the light will have spread out to form a sphere with a radial of 300 meters; after two millionths of a second, the radial will be 600 meters; and so on.|After one millionth of a second the light will have spread out to form a sphere with a radius of 300 meters; after two millionths of a second, the radius will be 600 meters; and so on.
It will be like the ripple that spread out on the surface of a pond when a stone is thrown in.|It will be like the ripples that spread out on the surface of a pond when a stone is thrown in.
givenness an event P, one can divide the other events in the universe into three classes.|Given an event P, one can divide the other events in the universe into three classes.
Those events that can be reached from the event P by a particle or wave traveling at or below the speed of light are saying to be in the future of P. They will lie within or on the expanding sphere of light emitted from the event P. Thus they will lie within or on the future light cone of P in the space-time diagram.|Those events that can be reached from the event P by a particle or wave traveling at or below the speed of light are said to be in the future of P. They will lie within or on the expanding sphere of light emitted from the event P. Thus they will lie within or on the future light cone of P in the space-time diagram.
Only events in the future of P can being affected by what happens at P beingcause nothing can travel faster than light.We would know about it only after eight minutes, the time it takes light to reach us from the sun.|Only events in the future of P can be affected by what happens at P because nothing can travel faster than light.We would know about it only after eight minutes, the time it takes light to reach us from the sun.
If one neglects gravitational effects, as Einstein and Poincare did in 1905, one has what is called the special theorise of relativity.|If one neglects gravitational effects, as Einstein and Poincare did in 1905, one has what is called the special theory of relativity.
For every event in space-time we may construct a light cone (the set of all possible paths of light in space-time emitted at that event), and since the speed of light is the sameness at every event and in every direction, all the light cones will be identical and will all point in the sameness direction.|For every event in space-time we may construct a light cone (the set of all possible paths of light in space-time emitted at that event), and since the speed of light is the same at every event and in every direction, all the light cones will be identical and will all point in the same direction.
The theorise also tells us that nothing can travel faster than light.|The theory also tells us that nothing can travel faster than light.
This means that the path of any object through space and time must be representative by a line that lies within the light cone at each event on it (Fig.|This means that the path of any object through space and time must be represented by a line that lies within the light cone at each event on it (Fig.
The special theoretic of relativity was very successful in explaining that the speed of light appears the same to all observers (as shown by the Michelson-Morley experiment) and in describing what happens when things move at speeds close to the speed of light.|The special theory of relativity was very successful in explaining that the speed of light appears the same to all observers (as shown by the Michelson-Morley experiment) and in describing what happens when things move at speeds close to the speed of light.
However, it was inconsistent with the Newtonian theory of gravity, which said that objects attracted each other with a force that depended on the distant between them.|However, it was inconsistent with the Newtonian theory of gravity, which said that objects attracted each other with a force that depended on the distance between them.
This meant that if one moved one of the object, the force on the other one would change instantaneously.|This meant that if one moved one of the objects, the force on the other one would change instantaneously.
Or in other gravitational effects should travel with infinite velocity, instead of at or below the speed of light, as the special theory of relative required.|Or in other gravitational effects should travel with infinite velocity, instead of at or below the speed of light, as the special theory of relativity required.
Einstein made a number of unsuccessful attempts between 1908 and 1914 to finding a theory of gravity that was consistent with special relativity.|Einstein made a number of unsuccessful attempts between 1908 and 1914 to find a theory of gravity that was consistent with special relativity.
Finally, in 1915, he proposed what we now call the general theorise of relativity.|Finally, in 1915, he proposed what we now call the general theory of relativity.
Einstein made the revolutionary suggestion that gravity is not a force like other force, but is a consequence of the fact that space-time is not flat, as had been previously assumed: it is curved, or “warped,” by the distribution of mass and energy in it.|Einstein made the revolutionary suggestion that gravity is not a force like other forces, but is a consequence of the fact that space-time is not flat, as had been previously assumed: it is curved, or “warped,” by the distribution of mass and energy in it.
Bodies like the earth are not made to move on curved orbits by a force called gravity; instead, they follow the near thing to a straight path in a curved space, which is called a geodesic.|Bodies like the earth are not made to move on curved orbits by a force called gravity; instead, they follow the nearest thing to a straight path in a curved space, which is called a geodesic.
A geodesic is the shortest (or long) path between two nearby points.|A geodesic is the shortest (or longest) path between two nearby points.
For exemplify, the surface of the earth is a two-dimensional curved space.|For example, the surface of the earth is a two-dimensional curved space.
A geodesic on the earth being called a great circle, and being the shortest route between two points (Fig.|A geodesic on the earth is called a great circle, and is the shortest route between two points (Fig.
In general relativity, bodies always follow straight lines in four-dimensional space-time, but they nevertheless appearance to us to move along curved paths in our three-dimensional space.|In general relativity, bodies always follow straight lines in four-dimensional space-time, but they nevertheless appear to us to move along curved paths in our three-dimensional space.
(This is rather like watching an airplane fly over hilly ground.|(This is rather like watching an airplane flying over hilly ground.
Although it following a straight line in three-dimensional space, its shadow following a curved path on the two-dimensional ground.)|Although it follows a straight line in three-dimensional space, its shadow follows a curved path on the two-dimensional ground.)
The mass of the sun curve space-time in such a way that although the earth follows a straight path in four-dimensional space-time, it appears to us to move along a circular orbit in three-dimensional space.|The mass of the sun curves space-time in such a way that although the earth follows a straight path in four-dimensional space-time, it appears to us to move along a circular orbit in three-dimensional space.
Fact, the orbits of the planetal predicted by general relativity are almost exactly the same as those predicted by the Newtonian theory of gravity.|Fact, the orbits of the planets predicted by general relativity are almost exactly the same as those predicted by the Newtonian theory of gravity.
However, in the case of Mercury, which, being the nearest planet to the sun, feels the strongest gravitational effects, and has a rather elongnessated orbit, general relativity predicts that the longness axis of the ellipse should rotate about the sun at a rate of about one degree in ten thousand years.|However, in the case of Mercury, which, being the nearest planet to the sun, feels the strongest gravitational effects, and has a rather elongated orbit, general relativity predicts that the long axis of the ellipse should rotate about the sun at a rate of about one degree in ten thousand years.
Small though this effect is, it had being noticed before 1915 and served as one of the first confirmations of Einstein’s theory.|Small though this effect is, it had been noticed before 1915 and served as one of the first confirmations of Einstein’s theory.
In recent years the even smaller deviations of the orbit of the other planets from the Newtonian predictions have been measured by radar and found to agree with the predictions of general relativity.|In recent years the even smaller deviations of the orbits of the other planets from the Newtonian predictions have been measured by radar and found to agree with the predictions of general relativity.
Light ray too must follow geodesics in space-time.|Light rays too must follow geodesics in space-time.
Again, the fact that space is curved means that light no longer appears to travel in straight lineal in space.|Again, the fact that space is curved means that light no longer appears to travel in straight lines in space.
So general relative predicts that light should be bent by gravitational fields.|So general relativity predicts that light should be bent by gravitational fields.
For example, the theory predicts that the light cones of points near the sun would being slightly beingnt inward, on account of the mass of the sun.|For example, the theory predicts that the light cones of points near the sun would be slightly bent inward, on account of the mass of the sun.
This means that light from a distant star that happened to pass near the sun would being deflected through a small angle, causing the star to appear in a different position to an observer on the earth (Fig.|This means that light from a distant star that happened to pass near the sun would be deflected through a small angle, causing the star to appear in a different position to an observer on the earth (Fig.
Of course, if the light from the star always passed close to the sun, we would not be ability to tell whether the light was being deflected or if instead the star was really where we see it.|Of course, if the light from the star always passed close to the sun, we would not be able to tell whether the light was being deflected or if instead the star was really where we see it.
However, as the earth orbit around the sun, different stars appear to pass behind the sun and have their light deflected.|However, as the earth orbits around the sun, different stars appear to pass behind the sun and have their light deflected.
They therefore change their apparent position relative to otherness stars.|They therefore change their apparent position relative to other stars.
It is normally very difficult to see this effect, because the light from the sun makes it impossible to observe star that appear near to the sun the sky.|It is normally very difficult to see this effect, because the light from the sun makes it impossible to observe stars that appear near to the sun the sky.
However, it is possibleness to do so during an eclipse of the sun, when the sun’s light is blocked out by the moon.|However, it is possible to do so during an eclipse of the sun, when the sun’s light is blocked out by the moon.
Einstein’s prediction of light deflection could not be tested immediately in 1915, because the First World War was in progress, and it was not until 1919 that a British expedition, observing an eclipse from West Africa, showed that light was indeed deflected by the sun, just as predicted by the theorise.|Einstein’s prediction of light deflection could not be tested immediately in 1915, because the First World War was in progress, and it was not until 1919 that a British expedition, observing an eclipse from West Africa, showed that light was indeed deflected by the sun, just as predicted by the theory.
This proof of a German theorise by British scientists was hailed as a great act of reconciliation between the two countries after the war.|This proof of a German theory by British scientists was hailed as a great act of reconciliation between the two countries after the war.
It is ionic, therefore, that later examination of the photographs taken on that expedition showing the errors were as great as the effect they were trying to measure.|It is ionic, therefore, that later examination of the photographs taken on that expedition showed the errors were as great as the effect they were trying to measure.
Their measure had been sheer luck, or a case of knowing the result they wanted to get, not an uncommon occurrence in science.|Their measurement had been sheer luck, or a case of knowing the result they wanted to get, not an uncommon occurrence in science.
Another prediction of general relativity is that time should appear to slower near a massive body like the earthly.|Another prediction of general relativity is that time should appear to slower near a massive body like the earth.
This is because there is a relation between the energize of light and its frequency (that is, the number of waves of light per second): the greater the energize, the higher frequency.|This is because there is a relation between the energy of light and its frequency (that is, the number of waves of light per second): the greater the energy, the higher frequency.
As light travels upward in the earthly’s gravitational field, it loses energy, and so its frequency goes down.|As light travels upward in the earth’s gravitational field, it loses energy, and so its frequency goes down.
To someone high up, it would appear that everything down below being making longer to happen.|To someone high up, it would appear that everything down below was making longer to happen.
This prediction was tested in 1962, using a pair of very accurate clock mounted at the top and bottom of a water tower.|This prediction was tested in 1962, using a pair of very accurate clocks mounted at the top and bottom of a water tower.
The clock at the bottom, which was nearer the earthly, was found to run slower, in exact agreement with general relativity.|The clock at the bottom, which was nearer the earth, was found to run slower, in exact agreement with general relativity.
The difference in the speed of clocks at different heights above the earth is now of considerable practical importance, with the advent of very accurate navigation systems baseness on signals from satellites.|The difference in the speed of clocks at different heights above the earth is now of considerable practical importance, with the advent of very accurate navigation systems based on signals from satellites.
If one ignored the predictions of general relativity, the position that one calculated would be wrongness by several miles!|If one ignored the predictions of general relativity, the position that one calculated would be wrong by several miles!
The theorise of relativity gets rid of absolute time.|The theory of relativity gets rid of absolute time.
consideration a pair of twins.|Consider a pair of twins.
supposal that one twin goes to live on the top of a mountain while the other stays at sea level.|Suppose that one twin goes to live on the top of a mountain while the other stays at sea level.
In this case, the difference in ages would being very small, but it would being much larger if one of the twins went for a long trip in a spaceship at nearly the speed of light.|In this case, the difference in ages would be very small, but it would be much larger if one of the twins went for a long trip in a spaceship at nearly the speed of light.
When he returned, he would be much youngness than the one who stayed on earth.|When he returned, he would be much younger than the one who stayed on earth.
This is known as the twins paradox, but it is a paradox only if one has the idea of absolute time at the backing of one’s mind.|This is known as the twins paradox, but it is a paradox only if one has the idea of absolute time at the back of one’s mind.
In the theory of relativity there being no unique absolute time, but instead each individual has hbeing own personal measure of time that depends on where he being and how he being moving.|In the theory of relativity there is no unique absolute time, but instead each individual has his own personal measure of time that depends on where he is and how he is moving.
Before 1915, space and time were thought of as a fixed arena in which events take place, but which was not affected by what happened in it.|Before 1915, space and time were thought of as a fixed arena in which events took place, but which was not affected by what happened in it.
Bodies moved, forces attraction and repelled, but time and space simply continued, unaffected.|Bodies moved, forces attracted and repelled, but time and space simply continued, unaffected.
It was natural to think that spatial and time went on forever.|It was natural to think that space and time went on forever.
The situate, however, is quite different in the general theory of relativity.|The situation, however, is quite different in the general theory of relativity.
Space and time are now dynamic quantities: when a bodily moves, or a force acts, it affects the curvature of space and time – and in turn the structure of space-time affects the way in which bodies move and forces act.|Space and time are now dynamic quantities: when a body moves, or a force acts, it affects the curvature of space and time – and in turn the structure of space-time affects the way in which bodies move and forces act.
Space and time not only affect but also being affected by everything that happens in the universe.|Space and time not only affect but also are affected by everything that happens in the universe.
Just as one cannot talk about events in the universe without the notions of space and time, so in general relative it became meaningless to talk about space and time outside the limits of the universe.|Just as one cannot talk about events in the universe without the notions of space and time, so in general relativity it became meaningless to talk about space and time outside the limits of the universe.
The old idea of an essentially unchanging universe that could have existed, and could continue to exist, forever being replaced by the notion of a dynamic, expanding universe that seemed to have begun a finite time ago, and that might end at a finite time in the future.|The old idea of an essentially unchanging universe that could have existed, and could continue to exist, forever was replaced by the notion of a dynamic, expanding universe that seemed to have begun a finite time ago, and that might end at a finite time in the future.
That revolve forms the subject of the next chapter.|That revolution forms the subject of the next chapter.
And years later, it was also to being the starting point for my work in theoretical physics.|And years later, it was also to be the starting point for my work in theoretical physics.
Roger Penrose and I showed that Einstein’s general theoretic of relativity implied that the universe must have a beginning and, possibly, an end.|Roger Penrose and I showed that Einstein’s general theory of relativity implied that the universe must have a beginning and, possibly, an end.
If one looks at the sky on a clear, moonless night, the brightest objects one sees are likely to be the planets Venus, Martian, Jupiter, and Saturn.|If one looks at the sky on a clear, moonless night, the brightest objects one sees are likely to be the planets Venus, Mars, Jupiter, and Saturn.
There will also be a very large number of star, which are just like our own sun but much farther from us.|There will also be a very large number of stars, which are just like our own sun but much farther from us.
Some of these fixing stars do, in fact, appear to change very slightly their positions relative to each other as earth orbits around the sun: they are not really fixing at all!|Some of these fixed stars do, in fact, appear to change very slightly their positions relative to each other as earth orbits around the sun: they are not really fixed at all!
This is because they being comparatively near to us.|This is because they are comparatively near to us.
As the earth goes round the sun, we see them from different position against the background of more distant stars.|As the earth goes round the sun, we see them from different positions against the background of more distant stars.
The nearest starry, called Proxima Centauri, is found to be about four light-years away (the light from it takes about four years to reach earth), or about twenty-three million million miles.|The nearest star, called Proxima Centauri, is found to be about four light-years away (the light from it takes about four years to reach earth), or about twenty-three million million miles.
The visible stars appear spread all over the night sky, but being particularly concentrated in one band, which we call the Milky Way.|The visible stars appear spread all over the night sky, but are particularly concentrated in one band, which we call the Milky Way.
As long ago as 1750, some astronomers were suggesting that the appearance of the Milky Way could be explained if most of the visible star lie in a single disklike configuration, one example of what we now call a spiral galaxy.|As long ago as 1750, some astronomers were suggesting that the appearance of the Milky Way could be explained if most of the visible stars lie in a single disklike configuration, one example of what we now call a spiral galaxy.
Only a few decades later, the astronomer Sir William Herschel confirmed this idea by painstakingly cataloging the positions and distances of vast numbers of star.|Only a few decades later, the astronomer Sir William Herschel confirmed this idea by painstakingly cataloging the positions and distances of vast numbers of stars.
evenness so, the idea gained complete acceptance only early this century.|Even so, the idea gained complete acceptance only early this century.
Our modern pictural of the universe dates back to only 1924, when the American astronomer Edwin Hubble demonstrated that ours was not the only galaxy.|Our modern picture of the universe dates back to only 1924, when the American astronomer Edwin Hubble demonstrated that ours was not the only galaxy.
In order to prove this, he needed to determine the distances to these other galaxies, which are so far away that, unlike nearby stars, they really do appear fixing.|In order to prove this, he needed to determine the distances to these other galaxies, which are so far away that, unlike nearby stars, they really do appear fixed.
Hubble was forced, therefore, to use indirect methods to measure the distance.|Hubble was forced, therefore, to use indirect methods to measure the distances.
For nearby stars, we can measurable their apparent brightness and their distance, and so we can work out their luminosity.|For nearby stars, we can measure their apparent brightness and their distance, and so we can work out their luminosity.
Conversely, if we knew the luminosity of stars in other galaxies, we could work out their distance by measure their apparent brightness.|Conversely, if we knew the luminosity of stars in other galaxies, we could work out their distance by measuring their apparent brightness.
Hubble noted that certain types of stars always have the same luminosity when they are near enough for us to measure; therefore, he argued, if we found such stars in another galactic, we could assume that they had the same luminosity – and so calculate the distance to that galactic.|Hubble noted that certain types of stars always have the same luminosity when they are near enough for us to measure; therefore, he argued, if we found such stars in another galaxy, we could assume that they had the same luminosity – and so calculate the distance to that galaxy.
If we could do this for a number of stars in the same galaxy, and our calculate always gave the same distance, we could be fairly confident of our estimate.|If we could do this for a number of stars in the same galaxy, and our calculations always gave the same distance, we could be fairly confident of our estimate.
In this way, Edwin Hubble worked out the distances to nine difference galaxies.|In this way, Edwin Hubble worked out the distances to nine different galaxies.
We now know that our galaxy is only one of some hundred thousand million that can being seen using modern telescopes, each galaxy itself containing some hundred thousand million stars.|We now know that our galaxy is only one of some hundred thousand million that can be seen using modern telescopes, each galaxy itself containing some hundred thousand million stars.
Our sun is just an ordinary, average-sized, yellow star, near the inner edge of one of the spiral arm.|Our sun is just an ordinary, average-sized, yellow star, near the inner edge of one of the spiral arms.
We have certainly come a long way since Aristotle and Ptolemy, when think that the earth was the center of the universe!|We have certainly come a long way since Aristotle and Ptolemy, when thought that the earth was the center of the universe!
Stars are so far away that they appear to us to be justness pinpoints of light.|Stars are so far away that they appear to us to be just pinpoints of light.
So how can we tell differ types of stars apart?|So how can we tell different types of stars apart?
For the vast majority of stars, there being only one characterbeingtic feature that we can observe – the color of their light.|For the vast majority of stars, there is only one characteristic feature that we can observe – the color of their light.
Newton discovered that if light from the sun passes through a triangular-shaped piece of glass, called a prism, it break up into its component colors (its spectrum) as in a rainbow.|Newton discovered that if light from the sun passes through a triangular-shaped piece of glass, called a prism, it breaks up into its component colors (its spectrum) as in a rainbow.
By focusing a telescope on an individual starry or galaxy, one can similarly observe the spectrum of the light from that starry or galaxy.|By focusing a telescope on an individual star or galaxy, one can similarly observe the spectrum of the light from that star or galaxy.
Different stars have different spectra, but the relative brightness of the different colors is always exactly what one would expect to find in the light emitted by an object that is glow red hot.|Different stars have different spectra, but the relative brightness of the different colors is always exactly what one would expect to find in the light emitted by an object that is glowing red hot.
(In fact, the light emitted by any opaque object that being glowing red hot has a characterbeingtic spectrum that depends only on its temperature – a thermal spectrum.|(In fact, the light emitted by any opaque object that is glowing red hot has a characteristic spectrum that depends only on its temperature – a thermal spectrum.
This mean that we can tell a star’s temperature from the spectrum of its light.)|This means that we can tell a star’s temperature from the spectrum of its light.)
Moreover, we find that certain very specific colors are missing from stars’ spectral, and these missing colors may vary from star to star.|Moreover, we find that certain very specific colors are missing from stars’ spectra, and these missing colors may vary from star to star.
Since we know that each chemical element absorbs a characteristic set of very specific color, by matching these to those that are missing from a star’s spectrum, we can determine exactly which elements are present in the star’s atmosphere.|Since we know that each chemical element absorbs a characteristic set of very specific colors, by matching these to those that are missing from a star’s spectrum, we can determine exactly which elements are present in the star’s atmosphere.
In the 1920s, when astronomers began to look at the spectra of stars in other galaxies, they found something most peculiar: there were the same characteristic set of missing colors as for stars in our own galaxy, but they were all shifted by the same relative amount toward the red end of the spectrum.|In the 1920s, when astronomers began to look at the spectra of stars in other galaxies, they found something most peculiar: there were the same characteristic sets of missing colors as for stars in our own galaxy, but they were all shifted by the same relative amount toward the red end of the spectrum.
As we have seen, visible light consists of fluctuations, or waves, in the electromagnetism field.|As we have seen, visible light consists of fluctuations, or waves, in the electromagnetic field.
The different wavelengths of light are what the human eye sees as different color, with the longest wavelengths appearing at the red end of the spectrum and the shortest wavelengths at the blue end.|The different wavelengths of light are what the human eye sees as different colors, with the longest wavelengths appearing at the red end of the spectrum and the shortest wavelengths at the blue end.
Now imagine a source of light at a constancy distance from us, such as a star, emitting waves of light at a constancy wavelength.|Now imagine a source of light at a constant distance from us, such as a star, emitting waves of light at a constant wavelength.
Obviously the wavelength ofthe waves we receive will being the same as the wavelength at which they are emitted (the gravitational field of the galaxy will not being large enough to have a significant effect).|Obviously the wavelength ofthe waves we receive will be the same as the wavelength at which they are emitted (the gravitational field of the galaxy will not be large enough to have a significant effect).
Suppose now that the source start moving toward us.|Suppose now that the source starts moving toward us.
When the source emits the next wave crest it will be nearer to us, so the distance between wave crests will be smaller than when the star being stationary.|When the source emits the next wave crest it will be nearer to us, so the distance between wave crests will be smaller than when the star was stationary.
This means that the wavelength of the waves we receive is shorter than when the star being stationary.|This means that the wavelength of the waves we receive is shorter than when the star was stationary.
In the case of light, therefore, means that stars moving away from us will have their spectra shifted toward the red end of the spectral (red-shifted) and those moving toward us will have their spectra blue-shifted.|In the case of light, therefore, means that stars moving away from us will have their spectra shifted toward the red end of the spectrum (red-shifted) and those moving toward us will have their spectra blue-shifted.
Thbeing relationship between wavelength and speed, which being called the Doppler effect, being an everyday experience.|This relationship between wavelength and speed, which is called the Doppler effect, is an everyday experience.
Listen to a car passing on the road: as the car is approaching, its engine sounds at a higher pitch (corresponding to a shorter wavelength and higher frequent of sound waves), and when it passes and goes away, it sounds at a lower pitch.|Listen to a car passing on the road: as the car is approaching, its engine sounds at a higher pitch (corresponding to a shorter wavelength and higher frequency of sound waves), and when it passes and goes away, it sounds at a lower pitch.
The behavior of light or radio waves is similarity.|The behavior of light or radio waves is similar.
Indeed, the police make use of the Doppler effect to measure the speed of cars by measuring the wavelength of pulse of radio waves reflected off them.|Indeed, the police make use of the Doppler effect to measure the speed of cars by measuring the wavelength of pulses of radio waves reflected off them.
It was quite a surprise, therefore, to find that most galaxies appeared red-shifted: nearly all were moving awayness from us!|It was quite a surprise, therefore, to find that most galaxies appeared red-shifted: nearly all were moving away from us!
More surprising still was the finding that Hubble published in 1929: evenness the size of a galaxy’s red shift is not random, but is directly proportional to the galaxy’s distance from us.|More surprising still was the finding that Hubble published in 1929: even the size of a galaxy’s red shift is not random, but is directly proportional to the galaxy’s distance from us.
Or, in other words, the farther a galaxy is, the faster it is mover away!|Or, in other words, the farther a galaxy is, the faster it is moving away!
And that meant that the universe could not be static, as everyone previously had thought, being in fact expanding; the dbeingtance between the different galaxies being changing all the time.|And that meant that the universe could not be static, as everyone previously had thought, is in fact expanding; the distance between the different galaxies is changing all the time.
The discovery that the universe is expanding was one of the great intellectual revolve of the twentieth century.|The discovery that the universe is expanding was one of the great intellectual revolutions of the twentieth century.
With hindsight, it being easy wonder why no one had thought of it before.|With hindsight, it is easy wonder why no one had thought of it before.
Newton, and others should have realized that a static universe would soon start to contract under the influential of gravity.|Newton, and others should have realized that a static universe would soon start to contract under the influence of gravity.
If it was expanding fairly slowly, the force of gravity would cause it eventually to stop expanding and then to start contractual.|If it was expanding fairly slowly, the force of gravity would cause it eventually to stop expanding and then to start contracting.
However, if it being expanding at more than a certain critical rate, gravity would never be strong enough to stop it, and the universe would continue to expand forever.|However, if it was expanding at more than a certain critical rate, gravity would never be strong enough to stop it, and the universe would continue to expand forever.
This is a bit like what happens when one fire a rocket upward from the surface of the earth.|This is a bit like what happens when one fires a rocket upward from the surface of the earth.
On the other hand, if the rocket has more than a certain critical speed (about seven miles per second), gravity will not be strong enough to pull it back, so it will keep going away from the earthly forever.|On the other hand, if the rocket has more than a certain critical speed (about seven miles per second), gravity will not be strong enough to pull it back, so it will keep going away from the earth forever.
This behavior of the universe could have been predictor from Newton’s theory of gravity at any time in the nineteenth, the eighteenth, or even the late seventeenth century.|This behavior of the universe could have been predicted from Newton’s theory of gravity at any time in the nineteenth, the eighteenth, or even the late seventeenth century.
Yet so strong was the belief in a static universe that it persistence into the early twentieth century.|Yet so strong was the belief in a static universe that it persisted into the early twentieth century.
Even Einstein, when he formulated the general theory of relative in 1915, was so sure that the universe had to be static that he modified his theory to make this possible, introducing a so-called cosmological constant into his equations.|Even Einstein, when he formulated the general theory of relativity in 1915, was so sure that the universe had to be static that he modified his theory to make this possible, introducing a so-called cosmological constant into his equations.
Einstein introduced a new “antigravity” force, which, unlike otherness forces, did not come from any particular source but was built into the very fabric of space-time.|Einstein introduced a new “antigravity” force, which, unlike other forces, did not come from any particular source but was built into the very fabric of space-time.
He claimed that space-time have an inbuilt tendency to expand, and this could be made to balance exactly the attraction of all the matter in the universe, so that a static universe would result.|He claimed that space-time had an inbuilt tendency to expand, and this could be made to balance exactly the attraction of all the matter in the universe, so that a static universe would result.
Only one man, it seems, was willing to take general relativity at face value, and while Einstein and other physicists were looking for ways of avoidance general relativity’s prediction of a nonstatic universe, the Russian physicist and mathematician Alexander Friedmann instead set about explaining it.|Only one man, it seems, was willing to take general relativity at face value, and while Einstein and other physicists were looking for ways of avoiding general relativity’s prediction of a nonstatic universe, the Russian physicist and mathematician Alexander Friedmann instead set about explaining it.
Friedmann made two very simple assume about the universe: that the universe looks identical in whichever direction we look, and that this would also be true if we were observing the universe from anywhere else.|Friedmann made two very simple assumptions about the universe: that the universe looks identical in whichever direction we look, and that this would also be true if we were observing the universe from anywhere else.
From these two ideas alone, Friedmann showed that we should not expectation the universe to be static.|From these two ideas alone, Friedmann showed that we should not expect the universe to be static.
In fact, in 1922, several years before Edwin Hubble’s discover, Friedmann predicted exactly what Hubble found!|In fact, in 1922, several years before Edwin Hubble’s discovery, Friedmann predicted exactly what Hubble found!
The assume that the universe looks the same in every direction is clearly not true in reality.|The assumption that the universe looks the same in every direction is clearly not true in reality.
For example, as we have seen, the other starry in our galaxy form a distinct band of light across the night sky, called the Milky Way.|For example, as we have seen, the other stars in our galaxy form a distinct band of light across the night sky, called the Milky Way.
But if we look at distant galaxies, there seems to be more or less the sameness number of them.|But if we look at distant galaxies, there seems to be more or less the same number of them.
So the universe does seem to be roughly the same in every direction, provided one views it on a large scale comparative to the distance between galaxies, and ignores the differences on small scales.|So the universe does seem to be roughly the same in every direction, provided one views it on a large scale compared to the distance between galaxies, and ignores the differences on small scales.
For a long time, this was sufficient justification for Friedmann’s assume – as a rough approximation to the real universe.|For a long time, this was sufficient justification for Friedmann’s assumption – as a rough approximation to the real universe.
But more recently a luckiness accident uncovered the fact that Friedmann’s assumption is in fact a remarkably accuratedescription of our universe.|But more recently a lucky accident uncovered the fact that Friedmann’s assumption is in fact a remarkably accuratedescription of our universe.
In 1965 two American physicists at the Bell Telephone Laboratories in New Jersey, Arno Penzias and Robert Wilson, were testing a very sensitivity microwave detector.|In 1965 two American physicists at the Bell Telephone Laboratories in New Jersey, Arno Penzias and Robert Wilson, were testing a very sensitive microwave detector.
Penzias and Wilson were worried when they found that their detector was pick up more noise than it ought to.|Penzias and Wilson were worried when they found that their detector was picking up more noise than it ought to.
The noise did not appearance to be coming from any particular direction.|The noise did not appear to be coming from any particular direction.
First they discovered bird droppings in their detector and checked for other possibleness malfunctions, but soon ruled these out.|First they discovered bird droppings in their detector and checked for other possible malfunctions, but soon ruled these out.
They knew that any noise from within the atmosphere would be stronger when the detector was not pointing straight up than when it was, because light rays travel through much more atmosphere when receptive from near the horizon than when receptive from directly overhead.|They knew that any noise from within the atmosphere would be stronger when the detector was not pointing straight up than when it was, because light rays travel through much more atmosphere when received from near the horizon than when received from directly overhead.
The extra noise was the same whichever direction the detector was pointed, so it must coming from outside the atmosphere.|The extra noise was the same whichever direction the detector was pointed, so it must come from outside the atmosphere.
It was also the sameness day and night and throughout the year, even though the earth was rotating on its axis and orbiting around the sun.|It was also the same day and night and throughout the year, even though the earth was rotating on its axis and orbiting around the sun.
This showed that the radiation must come from beyond the Solar System, and even from beyond the galactic, as otherwise it would vary as the movement of earth pointed the detector in different directions.|This showed that the radiation must come from beyond the Solar System, and even from beyond the galaxy, as otherwise it would vary as the movement of earth pointed the detector in different directions.
In fact, we know that the radiation must have traveled to us across most of the observe universe, and since it appears to be the same in different directions, the universe must also be the same in every direction, if only on a large scale.|In fact, we know that the radiation must have traveled to us across most of the observable universe, and since it appears to be the same in different directions, the universe must also be the same in every direction, if only on a large scale.
We now know that whichever direction we look, this noise never varies by more than a tiny fraction: so Penzias and Wilson had unwittingly stumbled across a remarkably accurate confirmation of Friedmann’s first assume.|We now know that whichever direction we look, this noise never varies by more than a tiny fraction: so Penzias and Wilson had unwittingly stumbled across a remarkably accurate confirmation of Friedmann’s first assumption.
However, because the universe is not exactly the same in every direction, but only on average on a largeness scale, the microwaves cannot be exactly the same in every direction either.|However, because the universe is not exactly the same in every direction, but only on average on a large scale, the microwaves cannot be exactly the same in every direction either.
There have to be slight vary between different directions.|There have to be slight variations between different directions.
These were first detected in 1992 by the Cosmic Background Explorer satellite, or COBE, at a level of about one partitive in a hundred thousand.|These were first detected in 1992 by the Cosmic Background Explorer satellite, or COBE, at a level of about one part in a hundred thousand.
Small though these variations being, they being very important, as will be explained in Chapter 8.|Small though these variations are, they are very important, as will be explained in Chapter 8.
At roughly the same time as Penzias and Wilson were investigating noise in their detector, two Americanize physicists at nearby Princeton University, Bob Dicke and Jim Peebles, were also taking an interest in microwaves.|At roughly the same time as Penzias and Wilson were investigating noise in their detector, two American physicists at nearby Princeton University, Bob Dicke and Jim Peebles, were also taking an interest in microwaves.
They were working on a suggestion, made by George Gamow (once a student of Alexander Friedmann), that the early universe should have been very hot and dense, glow white hot.|They were working on a suggestion, made by George Gamow (once a student of Alexander Friedmann), that the early universe should have been very hot and dense, glowing white hot.
Dicke and Peebles argued that we should still be able to see the glow of the earliness universe, because light from very distant parts of it would only just be reaching us now.|Dicke and Peebles argued that we should still be able to see the glow of the early universe, because light from very distant parts of it would only just be reaching us now.
However, the expansion of the universe meant that this light should being so greatly red-shifted that it would appear to us now as microwave radiation.|However, the expansion of the universe meant that this light should be so greatly red-shifted that it would appear to us now as microwave radiation.
Dicke and Peebles were preparing to look for this radiate when Penzias and Wilson heard about their work and realized that they had already found it.|Dicke and Peebles were preparing to look for this radiation when Penzias and Wilson heard about their work and realized that they had already found it.
Now at first sight, all thbeing evidence that the universe looks the same whichever direction we look in might seem to suggest there being something special about our place in the universe.|Now at first sight, all this evidence that the universe looks the same whichever direction we look in might seem to suggest there is something special about our place in the universe.
In particular, it might seem that if we observe all other galaxies to be moving awayness from us, then we must be at the center of the universe.|In particular, it might seem that if we observe all other galaxies to be moving away from us, then we must be at the center of the universe.
We believe it only on ground of modesty: it would be most remarkable if the universe looked the same in every direction around us, but not around other points in the universe!|We believe it only on grounds of modesty: it would be most remarkable if the universe looked the same in every direction around us, but not around other points in the universe!
In Friedmann’s model, all the galaxies are moving directly awayness from each other.|In Friedmann’s model, all the galaxies are moving directly away from each other.
The situate is rather like a balloon with a number of spots painted on it being steadily blown up.|The situation is rather like a balloon with a number of spots painted on it being steadily blown up.
As the balloon expands, the distance beingtween any two spots increases, but there is no spot that can being said to being the center of the expansion.|As the balloon expands, the distance between any two spots increases, but there is no spot that can be said to be the center of the expansion.
Despite the success of his model and his prediction of Hubble’s observations, Friedmann’s work remained largely unknown in the West until similar models were discovered in 1935 by the American physicist Howard Robertson and the British mathematician Arthurian Walker, in response to Hubble’s discovery of the uniform expansion of the universe.|Despite the success of his model and his prediction of Hubble’s observations, Friedmann’s work remained largely unknown in the West until similar models were discovered in 1935 by the American physicist Howard Robertson and the British mathematician Arthur Walker, in response to Hubble’s discovery of the uniform expansion of the universe.
In the first kind (which Friedmann found) the universe is expanding sufficiently slowly that the gravitational attraction between the different galaxies causes the expand to slow down and eventually to stop.|In the first kind (which Friedmann found) the universe is expanding sufficiently slowly that the gravitational attraction between the different galaxies causes the expansion to slow down and eventually to stop.
The galaxies then start to move toward each other and the universe contracts.A remarkable feature of the first kind of Friedmann model being that in it the universe being not infinite in space, but neither does space have any boundary.|The galaxies then start to move toward each other and the universe contracts.A remarkable feature of the first kind of Friedmann model is that in it the universe is not infinite in space, but neither does space have any boundary.
If one keeps traveling in a certain direction on the surface of the earth, one never comes up against an impassable barrier or falls over the edge, but eventually comes back to where one start.|If one keeps traveling in a certain direction on the surface of the earth, one never comes up against an impassable barrier or falls over the edge, but eventually comes back to where one started.
In the first kind of Friedmann model, space is just like this, but with three dimension instead of two for the earth’s surface.|In the first kind of Friedmann model, space is just like this, but with three dimensions instead of two for the earth’s surface.
We shall see later that when one combines generality relativity with the uncertainty principle of quantum mechanics, it is possible for both space and time to be finite without any edges or boundaries.|We shall see later that when one combines general relativity with the uncertainty principle of quantum mechanics, it is possible for both space and time to be finite without any edges or boundaries.
The idea that one could go right round the universe and end up where one started makes good science fiction, but it doesn’t have much practical signify, because it can be shown that the universe would recollapse to zero size before one could get round.|The idea that one could go right round the universe and end up where one started makes good science fiction, but it doesn’t have much practical significance, because it can be shown that the universe would recollapse to zero size before one could get round.
You would need to travel faster than light in order to end up where you started before the universe came to an end – and that is not allowance!|You would need to travel faster than light in order to end up where you started before the universe came to an end – and that is not allowed!
It is therefore finite in extend.|It is therefore finite in extent.
In the second kind of model, which expands forever, space being bent the other way, like the surface of a saddle.|In the second kind of model, which expands forever, space is bent the other way, like the surface of a saddle.
Finally, in the third kind of Friedmann model, with just the critical rate of expansion, space is flatness (and therefore is also infinite).|Finally, in the third kind of Friedmann model, with just the critical rate of expansion, space is flat (and therefore is also infinite).
Will the universe eventually stop expanding and start contraction, or will it expand forever?|Will the universe eventually stop expanding and start contracting, or will it expand forever?
If the density is less than a certain critic value, determined by the rate of expansion, the gravitational attraction will be too weak to halt the expansion.|If the density is less than a certain critical value, determined by the rate of expansion, the gravitational attraction will be too weak to halt the expansion.
If the density is greatness than the critical value, gravity will stop the expansion at some time in the future and cause the universe to recollapse.|If the density is greater than the critical value, gravity will stop the expansion at some time in the future and cause the universe to recollapse.
We can determine the present rate of expansion by measuring the velocities at which other galaxies being moving away from us, using the Doppler effect.|We can determine the present rate of expansion by measuring the velocities at which other galaxies are moving away from us, using the Doppler effect.
However, the distances to the galactic are not very well known because we can only measure them indirectly.|However, the distances to the galaxies are not very well known because we can only measure them indirectly.
So all we know being that the universe being expanding by between 5 percent and 10 percent every thousand million years.|So all we know is that the universe is expanding by between 5 percent and 10 percent every thousand million years.
However, our uncertainty about the present average density of the universe being even greater.|However, our uncertainty about the present average density of the universe is even greater.
If we add up the masses of all the stars that we can see in our galaxy and other galaxies, the total is less than one hundredth of the amount required to halt the expansion of the universe, even for the low estimate of the rate of expansion.|If we add up the masses of all the stars that we can see in our galaxy and other galaxies, the total is less than one hundredth of the amount required to halt the expansion of the universe, even for the lowest estimate of the rate of expansion.
Our galaxy and other galaxies, however, must contain a large amount of “dark matter” that we cannot see directly, but which we knowing must be there because of the influence of its gravitational attraction on the orbits of stars in the galaxies.|Our galaxy and other galaxies, however, must contain a large amount of “dark matter” that we cannot see directly, but which we know must be there because of the influence of its gravitational attraction on the orbits of stars in the galaxies.
Moreover, most galaxies are found in clusters, and we can similarly infer the presence of yet more dark matter in between the galaxies in these clusters by its effective on the motion of the galaxies.|Moreover, most galaxies are found in clusters, and we can similarly infer the presence of yet more dark matter in between the galaxies in these clusters by its effect on the motion of the galaxies.
When we additive up all this dark matter, we still get only about one tenth of the amount required to halt the expansion.|When we add up all this dark matter, we still get only about one tenth of the amount required to halt the expansion.
However, we cannot exclude the possibility that there might be some other form of matter, distributed almost uniformly throughout the universe, that we have not yet detected and that might still raise the average density of the universe up to the critical valuable needed to halt the expansion.|However, we cannot exclude the possibility that there might be some other form of matter, distributed almost uniformly throughout the universe, that we have not yet detected and that might still raise the average density of the universe up to the critical value needed to halt the expansion.
The present evidence therefore suggests that the universe will probably expansive forever, but all we can really be sure of is that even if the universe is going to recollapse, it won’t do so for at least another ten thousand million years, since it has already been expansiveing for at least that long.|The present evidence therefore suggests that the universe will probably expand forever, but all we can really be sure of is that even if the universe is going to recollapse, it won’t do so for at least another ten thousand million years, since it has already been expanding for at least that long.
This should not unduly worry us: by that time, unless we have colonized beyond the Solar System, mankind will long since have died out, extinction along with our sun!|This should not unduly worry us: by that time, unless we have colonized beyond the Solar System, mankind will long since have died out, extinguished along with our sun!
All of the Friedmann solutions have the feature that at some time in the past (between ten and twenty thousand million years ago) the distance between neighbor galaxies must have been zero.|All of the Friedmann solutions have the feature that at some time in the past (between ten and twenty thousand million years ago) the distance between neighboring galaxies must have been zero.
At that time, which we call the bigness bang, the density of the universe and the curvature of space-time would have been infinite.|At that time, which we call the big bang, the density of the universe and the curvature of space-time would have been infinite.
Because mathematics cannot really handle infinite numbers, this means that the general theory of relativity (on which Friedmann’s solutions being based) predicts that there is a point in the universe where the theory itself breaks down.|Because mathematics cannot really handle infinite numbers, this means that the general theory of relativity (on which Friedmann’s solutions are based) predicts that there is a point in the universe where the theory itself breaks down.
Such a point is an exemplify of what mathematicians call a singularity.|Such a point is an example of what mathematicians call a singularity.
In fact, all our theories of science are formulated on the assumption that space-time being smooth and nearly fiat, so they break down at the big bang singularity, where the curvature of space-time being infinite.|In fact, all our theories of science are formulated on the assumption that space-time is smooth and nearly fiat, so they break down at the big bang singularity, where the curvature of space-time is infinite.
This means that even if there were events before the big bang, one could not use them to determine what would happen afterward, because predictable would break down at the big bang.|This means that even if there were events before the big bang, one could not use them to determine what would happen afterward, because predictability would break down at the big bang.
Correspondingly, if, as is the case, we knowable only what has happened since the big bang, we could not determine what happened beforehand.|Correspondingly, if, as is the case, we know only what has happened since the big bang, we could not determine what happened beforehand.
As far as we are concerned, events before the big bang can have no consequences, so they should not form partitive of a scientific model of the universe.|As far as we are concerned, events before the big bang can have no consequences, so they should not form part of a scientific model of the universe.
There were therefore a number of attempts to avoid the conclusion that there had been a bigness bang.|There were therefore a number of attempts to avoid the conclusion that there had been a big bang.
The proposal that gained wideness support was called the steady state theory.|The proposal that gained widest support was called the steady state theory.
It was suggested in 1948 by two refugees from Nazi-occupied Austrian, Hermann Bondi and Thomas Gold, together with a Briton, Fred Hoyle, who had worked with them on the development of radar during the war.|It was suggested in 1948 by two refugees from Nazi-occupied Austria, Hermann Bondi and Thomas Gold, together with a Briton, Fred Hoyle, who had worked with them on the development of radar during the war.
The idea was that as the galaxies moved awayness from each other, new galaxies were continually forming in the gaps in between, from new matter that was being continually created.|The idea was that as the galaxies moved away from each other, new galaxies were continually forming in the gaps in between, from new matter that was being continually created.
The universe would therefore look roughly the same at all times as well as at all points of spatial.|The universe would therefore look roughly the same at all times as well as at all points of space.
The steady state theory requirement a modification of general relativity to allow for the continual creation of matter, but the rate that was involved was so low (about one particle per cubic kilometer per year) that it was not in conflict with experiment.|The steady state theory required a modification of general relativity to allow for the continual creation of matter, but the rate that was involved was so low (about one particle per cubic kilometer per year) that it was not in conflict with experiment.
The theoretic was a good scientific theoretic, in the sense described in Chapter 1: it was simple and it made definite predictions that could be tested by observation.|The theory was a good scientific theory, in the sense described in Chapter 1: it was simple and it made definite predictions that could be tested by observation.
One of these predictions being that the number of galaxies or similar objects in any given volume of space should be the same wherever and whenever we look in the universe.|One of these predictions was that the number of galaxies or similar objects in any given volume of space should be the same wherever and whenever we look in the universe.
In the late 1950s and early 1960s a survey of sources of radio wave from outer space was carried out at Cambridge by a group of astronomers led by Martin Ryle (who had also worked with Bondi, Gold, and Hoyle on radar during the war).|In the late 1950s and early 1960s a survey of sources of radio waves from outer space was carried out at Cambridge by a group of astronomers led by Martin Ryle (who had also worked with Bondi, Gold, and Hoyle on radar during the war).
The Cambridge group showed that most of these radio sources must lie outside our galaxy (indeed many of them could be identifiable with other galaxies) and also that there were many more weak sources than strong ones.|The Cambridge group showed that most of these radio sources must lie outside our galaxy (indeed many of them could be identified with other galaxies) and also that there were many more weak sources than strong ones.
Then there appeared to being less common sources per unit volume of space for the nearby sources than for the distant ones.|Then there appeared to be less common sources per unit volume of space for the nearby sources than for the distant ones.
This could mean that we being at the center of a great region in the universe in which the sources being fewer than elsewhere.|This could mean that we are at the center of a great region in the universe in which the sources are fewer than elsewhere.
Alternatively, it could mean that the sources were more numerous in the past, at the time that the radio wave left on their journey to us, than they are now.|Alternatively, it could mean that the sources were more numerous in the past, at the time that the radio waves left on their journey to us, than they are now.
Either explain contradicted the predictions of the steady state theory.|Either explanation contradicted the predictions of the steady state theory.
The steady state theory therefore had to be abandoned.Another attempt to avoid the conclude that there must have been a big bang, and therefore a beginning of time, was made by two Russian scientists, Evgenii Lifshitz and Isaac Khalatnikov, in 1963.|The steady state theory therefore had to be abandoned.Another attempt to avoid the conclusion that there must have been a big bang, and therefore a beginning of time, was made by two Russian scientists, Evgenii Lifshitz and Isaac Khalatnikov, in 1963.
They suggested that the big bang might be a peculiarity of Friedmann’s models alone, which after all being only approximations to the real universe.|They suggested that the big bang might be a peculiarity of Friedmann’s models alone, which after all were only approximations to the real universe.
Perhaps, of all the model that were roughly like the real universe, only Friedmann’s would contain a big bang singularity.|Perhaps, of all the models that were roughly like the real universe, only Friedmann’s would contain a big bang singularity.
In Friedmann’s models, the galaxies being all moving directly away from each other – so it is not surprising that at some time in the past they were all at the same place.|In Friedmann’s models, the galaxies are all moving directly away from each other – so it is not surprising that at some time in the past they were all at the same place.
In the real universe, however, the galaxies are not just mover directly away from each other – they also have small sideways velocities.|In the real universe, however, the galaxies are not just moving directly away from each other – they also have small sideways velocities.
So in real they need never have been all at exactly the same place, only very close together.|So in reality they need never have been all at exactly the same place, only very close together.
Perhaps then the current expanding universe resulted not from a big bang singularity, but from an earlier contracting phase; as the universe had collapsed the particles in it might not have all collided, but had flown past and then away from each other, producing the present expansion of the the universe that were roughly like Friedmann’s models but took account of the irregularities and random velocities of galaxies in the reality universe.|Perhaps then the current expanding universe resulted not from a big bang singularity, but from an earlier contracting phase; as the universe had collapsed the particles in it might not have all collided, but had flown past and then away from each other, producing the present expansion of the the universe that were roughly like Friedmann’s models but took account of the irregularities and random velocities of galaxies in the real universe.
They showed that such models could start with a big bang, even though the galaxies were no longer always moving directly away from each other, but they claimed that this was still only possible in certain exceptional models in which the galaxies were all moving in justness the right way.|They showed that such models could start with a big bang, even though the galaxies were no longer always moving directly away from each other, but they claimed that this was still only possible in certain exceptional models in which the galaxies were all moving in just the right way.
They argued that since there seemed to be infinitely more Friedmann-like models without a big bang singularity than there were with one, we should conclude that there have not in reality been a big bang.|They argued that since there seemed to be infinitely more Friedmann-like models without a big bang singularity than there were with one, we should conclude that there had not in reality been a big bang.
They later realized, however, that there was a much more general class of Friedmann-like models that did have singularities, and in which the galaxies did not have to be mover any special way.|They later realized, however, that there was a much more general class of Friedmann-like models that did have singularities, and in which the galaxies did not have to be moving any special way.
The work of Lifshitz and Khalatnikov was valuable because it showed that the universe could have have a singularity, a big bang, if the general theory of relativity was correct.|The work of Lifshitz and Khalatnikov was valuable because it showed that the universe could have had a singularity, a big bang, if the general theory of relativity was correct.
The answer to this carne out of a completely differ approach introduced by a British mathematician and physicist, Roger Penrose, in 1965.|The answer to this carne out of a completely different approach introduced by a British mathematician and physicist, Roger Penrose, in 1965.
Using the way light cones behave in general relativity, together with the fact that gravitate is always attractive, he showed that a star collapsing under its own gravitate is trapped in a region whose surface eventually shrinks to zero size.|Using the way light cones behave in general relativity, together with the fact that gravity is always attractive, he showed that a star collapsing under its own gravity is trapped in a region whose surface eventually shrinks to zero size.
All the matter in the star will be compressing into a region of zero volume, so the density of matter and the curvature of space-time become infinite.|All the matter in the star will be compressed into a region of zero volume, so the density of matter and the curvature of space-time become infinite.
In other words, one has a singularity containment within a region of space-time known as a black hole.|In other words, one has a singularity contained within a region of space-time known as a black hole.
At first sight, Penrose’s result applied only to stars; it didn’t have anything to saying about the question of whether the entire universe had a big bang singularity in its past.|At first sight, Penrose’s result applied only to stars; it didn’t have anything to say about the question of whether the entire universe had a big bang singularity in its past.
However, at the time that Penrose produced his theorem, I was a research student desperately looking for a problem with which to completeness my Ph.D. thesis.|However, at the time that Penrose produced his theorem, I was a research student desperately looking for a problem with which to complete my Ph.D. thesis.
Two years before, I had been diagnosed as suffering from ALS, commonly known as Lou Gehrig’s disease, or motor neuron disease, and giving to understand that I had only one or two more years to live.|Two years before, I had been diagnosed as suffering from ALS, commonly known as Lou Gehrig’s disease, or motor neuron disease, and given to understand that I had only one or two more years to live.
In these circumstances there have not seemed much point in working on my Ph.D.– I did not expect to survive that long.|In these circumstances there had not seemed much point in working on my Ph.D.– I did not expect to survive that long.
Yet two years had go by and I was not that much worse.|Yet two years had gone by and I was not that much worse.
In fact, things being going rather well for me and I had gotten engaged to a very nice girl, Jane Wilde.|In fact, things were going rather well for me and I had gotten engaged to a very nice girl, Jane Wilde.
But in order to get married, I need a job, and in order to get a job, I need a Ph.D.|But in order to get married, I needed a job, and in order to get a job, I needed a Ph.D.
In 1965 I read about Penrose’s theorem that any body undergoing gravitational collapsible must eventually form a singularity.|In 1965 I read about Penrose’s theorem that any body undergoing gravitational collapse must eventually form a singularity.
I soon realized that if one reversed the direction of time in Penrose’s theorem, so that the collapse became an expansion, the conditions of his theorem would still hold, provident the universe were roughly like a Friedmann model on large scales at the present time.|I soon realized that if one reversed the direction of time in Penrose’s theorem, so that the collapse became an expansion, the conditions of his theorem would still hold, provided the universe were roughly like a Friedmann model on large scales at the present time.
Penrose’s theorem had shown that any collapse star must end in a singularity; the time-reversed argument showed that any Friedmann-like expanding universe must have begun with a singularity.|Penrose’s theorem had shown that any collapsing star must end in a singularity; the time-reversed argument showed that any Friedmann-like expanding universe must have begun with a singularity.
For technical reasons, Penrose’s theorem requirement that the universe be infinite in space.|For technical reasons, Penrose’s theorem required that the universe be infinite in space.
So I could in fact, use it to prove that there should be a singularity only if the universe was expanding fast enough to avoid collapsible again (since only those Friedmann models were infinite in space).|So I could in fact, use it to prove that there should be a singularity only if the universe was expanding fast enough to avoid collapsing again (since only those Friedmann models were infinite in space).
During the next few years I developed new mathematics techniques to remove this and other technical conditions from the theorems that proved that singularities must occur.|During the next few years I developed new mathematical techniques to remove this and other technical conditions from the theorems that proved that singularities must occur.
The final result was a joint papery by Penrose and myself in 1970, which at last proved that there must have been a big bang singularity provided only that general relativity is correct and the universe contains as much matter as we observe.|The final result was a joint paper by Penrose and myself in 1970, which at last proved that there must have been a big bang singularity provided only that general relativity is correct and the universe contains as much matter as we observe.
There was a lot of opposition to our work, partly from the Russians because of their Marxist belief in scientific determinism, and partly from people who felt that the whole idea of singularities was repugnant and spoiled the beauty of Einstein’s theorise.|There was a lot of opposition to our work, partly from the Russians because of their Marxist belief in scientific determinism, and partly from people who felt that the whole idea of singularities was repugnant and spoiled the beauty of Einstein’s theory.
However, one cannot really argumentative with a mathematical theorem.|However, one cannot really argue with a mathematical theorem.
So in the end our work became generally accepted and nowadays nearly everyone assumes that the universe started with a bigness bang singularity.|So in the end our work became generally accepted and nowadays nearly everyone assumes that the universe started with a big bang singularity.
It is perhaps ironic that, having changed my mind, I being now trying to convince other physicists that there was in fact no singularity at the beginning of the universe – as we shall see later, it can disappear once quantum effects are taken into account.|It is perhaps ironic that, having changed my mind, I am now trying to convince other physicists that there was in fact no singularity at the beginning of the universe – as we shall see later, it can disappear once quantum effects are taken into account.
Hubble’s discovery that the universe was expansion, and the realization of the insignificance of our own planet in the vastness of the universe, were just the starting point.|Hubble’s discovery that the universe was expanding, and the realization of the insignificance of our own planet in the vastness of the universe, were just the starting point.
As experimental and theoretical evidence mounted, it became more and more clearness that the universe must have had a beginning in time, until in 1970 this was finally proved by Penrose and myself, on the basis of Einstein’s general theory of relativity.|As experimental and theoretical evidence mounted, it became more and more clear that the universe must have had a beginning in time, until in 1970 this was finally proved by Penrose and myself, on the basis of Einstein’s general theory of relativity.
That proof showed that general relativity is only an incomplete theory: it cannot tell us how the universe started off, because it predicts that all physical theories, including itself, breakable down at the beginning of the universe.|That proof showed that general relativity is only an incomplete theory: it cannot tell us how the universe started off, because it predicts that all physical theories, including itself, break down at the beginning of the universe.
However, general relativity claims to be only a partial theoretic, so what the singularity theorems really show is that there must have been a time in the very early universe when the universe was so small that one could no longer ignore the small-scale effects of the other great partial theoretic of the twentieth century, quantum mechanics.|However, general relativity claims to be only a partial theory, so what the singularity theorems really show is that there must have been a time in the very early universe when the universe was so small that one could no longer ignore the small-scale effects of the other great partial theory of the twentieth century, quantum mechanics.
That theory, quantum mechanics, will be described next, before we turn to the efforts to combine the two partial theoretic into a single quantum theory of gravity.|That theory, quantum mechanics, will be described next, before we turn to the efforts to combine the two partial theories into a single quantum theory of gravity.
The success of scientific theories, particularly Newton’s theory of gravity, led the French scientist the Marquis de Laplace at the beginning of the nineteenth century to argumentative that the universe was completely deterministic.|The success of scientific theories, particularly Newton’s theory of gravity, led the French scientist the Marquis de Laplace at the beginning of the nineteenth century to argue that the universe was completely deterministic.
Laplace suggested that there should be a set of scientific laws that would allow us to predict everything that would happening in the universe, if only we knew the complete state of the universe at one time.|Laplace suggested that there should be a set of scientific laws that would allow us to predict everything that would happen in the universe, if only we knew the complete state of the universe at one time.
For example, if we knew the positions and speed of the sun and the planets at one time, then we could use Newton’s laws to calculate the state of the Solar System at any other time.|For example, if we knew the positions and speeds of the sun and the planets at one time, then we could use Newton’s laws to calculate the state of the Solar System at any other time.
Determinism seems fairly obvious in this case, but Laplace went further to assume that there being similar laws governing everything else, including human behavior.|Determinism seems fairly obvious in this case, but Laplace went further to assume that there were similar laws governing everything else, including human behavior.
The doctrine of scientific determinism was strongly resisted by many people, who felt that it infringement God’s freedom to intervene in the world, but it remained the standard assumption of science until the early years of this century.|The doctrine of scientific determinism was strongly resisted by many people, who felt that it infringed God’s freedom to intervene in the world, but it remained the standard assumption of science until the early years of this century.
One of the first indications that this belief would have to be abandoned came when calculations by the British scientists Lord Rayleigh and Sir James Jeans suggested that a hot object, or body, such as a starry, must radiate energy at an infinite rate.|One of the first indications that this belief would have to be abandoned came when calculations by the British scientists Lord Rayleigh and Sir James Jeans suggested that a hot object, or body, such as a star, must radiate energy at an infinite rate.
For exemplify, a hot body should radiate the same amount of energy in waves with frequencies between one and two million million waves a second as in waves with frequencies between two and three million million waves a second.|For example, a hot body should radiate the same amount of energy in waves with frequencies between one and two million million waves a second as in waves with frequencies between two and three million million waves a second.
Now since the number of waves a second is unlimited, this would mean that the totality energy radiated would be infinite.|Now since the number of waves a second is unlimited, this would mean that the total energy radiated would be infinite.
In order to avoid this obviously ridiculous result, the German scientist Max Planck suggested in 1900 that light, X ray, and other waves could not be emitted at an arbitrary rate, but only in certain packets that he called quanta.|In order to avoid this obviously ridiculous result, the German scientist Max Planck suggested in 1900 that light, X rays, and other waves could not be emitted at an arbitrary rate, but only in certain packets that he called quanta.
Moreover, each quantum had a certain amount of energy that was greatness the higher the frequency of the waves, so at a high enough frequency the emission of a single quantum would require more energy than was available.|Moreover, each quantum had a certain amount of energy that was greater the higher the frequency of the waves, so at a high enough frequency the emission of a single quantum would require more energy than was available.
Thus the radiation at high frequencies would be reducing, and so the rate at which the body lost energy would be finite.|Thus the radiation at high frequencies would be reduced, and so the rate at which the body lost energy would be finite.
The quantum hypothesis explained the observed rate of emission of radiation from hot bodies very well, but its implications for determinism were not realized until 1926, when another German scientist, Werner Heisenberg, formulation his famous uncertainty principle.|The quantum hypothesis explained the observed rate of emission of radiation from hot bodies very well, but its implications for determinism were not realized until 1926, when another German scientist, Werner Heisenberg, formulated his famous uncertainty principle.
In order to predict the future position and velocity of a particle, one has to being able to measure its present position and velocity accurately.|In order to predict the future position and velocity of a particle, one has to be able to measure its present position and velocity accurately.
The obvious way to doer this is to shine light on the particle.|The obvious way to do this is to shine light on the particle.
Some of the waves of light will be scattering by the particle and this will indicate its position.|Some of the waves of light will be scattered by the particle and this will indicate its position.
However, one will not be able to determine the position of the particle more accurately than the distant between the wave crests of light, so one needs to use light of a short wavelength in order to measure the position of the particle precisely.|However, one will not be able to determine the position of the particle more accurately than the distance between the wave crests of light, so one needs to use light of a short wavelength in order to measure the position of the particle precisely.
Now, by Planck’s quantal hypothesis, one cannot use an arbitrarily small amount of light; one has to use at least one quantal.|Now, by Planck’s quantum hypothesis, one cannot use an arbitrarily small amount of light; one has to use at least one quantum.
This quantum will disturb the particle and change its velocity in a way that cannot being predicted.|This quantum will disturb the particle and change its velocity in a way that cannot be predicted.
moreover, the more accurately one measures the position, the shorter the wavelength of the light that one needs and hence the higher the energize of a single quantum.|moreover, the more accurately one measures the position, the shorter the wavelength of the light that one needs and hence the higher the energy of a single quantum.
So the velocity of the particle will be disturbed by a large amount.|So the velocity of the particle will be disturbed by a larger amount.
In other words, the more accurately you try to measurable the position of the particle, the less accurately you can measurable its speed, and vice versa.|In other words, the more accurately you try to measure the position of the particle, the less accurately you can measure its speed, and vice versa.
Heisenberg showed that the uncertainty in the position of the particle times the uncertainty in its velocity times the mass of the particle can never be smaller than a certain quantity, which is knowable as Planck’s constant.|Heisenberg showed that the uncertainty in the position of the particle times the uncertainty in its velocity times the mass of the particle can never be smaller than a certain quantity, which is known as Planck’s constant.
Moreover, this limit does not depend on the way in which one try to measure the position or velocity of the particle, or on the type of particle: Heisenberg’s uncertainty principle is a fundamental, inescapable property of the world.|Moreover, this limit does not depend on the way in which one tries to measure the position or velocity of the particle, or on the type of particle: Heisenberg’s uncertainty principle is a fundamental, inescapable property of the world.
The uncertainty principle had profound implicate for the way in which we view the world.|The uncertainty principle had profound implications for the way in which we view the world.
Even after more than seventy years they have not been fully appreciated by many philosophic, and are still the subject of much controversy.|Even after more than seventy years they have not been fully appreciated by many philosophers, and are still the subject of much controversy.
The uncertainty principle signaled an end to Laplace’s dream of a theory of science, a model of the universe that would being completely deterministic: one certainly cannot predict future events exactly if one cannot even measure the present state of the universe precisely!|The uncertainty principle signaled an end to Laplace’s dream of a theory of science, a model of the universe that would be completely deterministic: one certainly cannot predict future events exactly if one cannot even measure the present state of the universe precisely!
We could still imagine that there is a set of laws that determine eventuate completely for some supernatural being, who could observe the present state of the universe without disturbing it.|We could still imagine that there is a set of laws that determine events completely for some supernatural being, who could observe the present state of the universe without disturbing it.
It seems better to employ the principle of economy known as Occam’s razor and cut out all the features of the theory that cannot be observance.|It seems better to employ the principle of economy known as Occam’s razor and cut out all the features of the theory that cannot be observed.
This approach led Heisenberg, Erwin Schrodinger, and Paul Dirac in the 1920s to reformulate mechanics into a new theory called quantal mechanics, based on the uncertainty principle.|This approach led Heisenberg, Erwin Schrodinger, and Paul Dirac in the 1920s to reformulate mechanics into a new theory called quantum mechanics, based on the uncertainty principle.
In this theory particles no longer had separate, well-defined positions and velocities that could not be observed, Instead, they had a quantum state, which being a combination of position and velocity.|In this theory particles no longer had separate, well-defined positions and velocities that could not be observed, Instead, they had a quantum state, which was a combination of position and velocity.
Instead, it predicts a number of different possibleness outcomes and tells us how likely each of these is.|Instead, it predicts a number of different possible outcomes and tells us how likely each of these is.
That is to say, if one made the same measurement on a large numerical of similar systems, each of which started off in the same way, one would find that the result of themeasurement would be A in a certain numerical of cases, B in a different numerical, and so on.|That is to say, if one made the same measurement on a large number of similar systems, each of which started off in the same way, one would find that the result of themeasurement would be A in a certain number of cases, B in a different number, and so on.
One could predict the approximate numbeingr of times that the result would being A or B, but one could not predict the specific result of an individual measurement.|One could predict the approximate number of times that the result would be A or B, but one could not predict the specific result of an individual measurement.
Quantum mechanics therefore introduces an unavoidable element of unpredictability or random into science.|Quantum mechanics therefore introduces an unavoidable element of unpredictability or randomness into science.
Einstein objected to this very strongly, despite the important role he have played in the development of these ideas.|Einstein objected to this very strongly, despite the important role he had played in the development of these ideas.
Einstein was awarded the Nobel Prize for his contribution to quantal theory.|Einstein was awarded the Nobel Prize for his contribution to quantum theory.
Nevertheless, Einstein never accepted that the universe was governed by chance; his feelings were summation up in his famous statement “God does not play dice.” Most other scientists, however, were willing to accept quantum mechanics because it agreed perfectly with experiment.|Nevertheless, Einstein never accepted that the universe was governed by chance; his feelings were summed up in his famous statement “God does not play dice.” Most other scientists, however, were willing to accept quantum mechanics because it agreed perfectly with experiment.
Indeed, it has being an outstandingly successful theory and underlies nearly all of modern science and technology.|Indeed, it has been an outstandingly successful theory and underlies nearly all of modern science and technology.
It governs the behavior of transistorize and integrated circuits, which are the essential components of electronic devices such as televisions and computers, and is also the basis of modern chemistry and biology.|It governs the behavior of transistors and integrated circuits, which are the essential components of electronic devices such as televisions and computers, and is also the basis of modern chemistry and biology.
The only areas of physical science into which quantum mechanics has not yet been properly incorporated are gravitate and the large-scale structure of the universe.|The only areas of physical science into which quantum mechanics has not yet been properly incorporated are gravity and the large-scale structure of the universe.
Although light is made up of waves, Planck’s quantum hypothesis tell us that in some ways it behaves as if it were composed of particles: it can be emitted or absorbed only in packets, or quanta.|Although light is made up of waves, Planck’s quantum hypothesis tells us that in some ways it behaves as if it were composed of particles: it can be emitted or absorbed only in packets, or quanta.
Equally, Heisenberg’s uncertainty principle implies that particles behave in some respect like waves: they do not have a definite position but are “smeared out” with a certain probability distribution.|Equally, Heisenberg’s uncertainty principle implies that particles behave in some respects like waves: they do not have a definite position but are “smeared out” with a certain probability distribution.
The theorise of quantum mechanics is based on an entirely new type of mathematics that no longer describes the real world in terms of particles and waves; it is only the observations of the world that may be described in those terms.|The theory of quantum mechanics is based on an entirely new type of mathematics that no longer describes the real world in terms of particles and waves; it is only the observations of the world that may be described in those terms.
There is thus a duality between waves and particles in quantal mechanics: for some purposes it is helpful to think of particles as waves and for other purposes it is better to think of waves as particles.|There is thus a duality between waves and particles in quantum mechanics: for some purposes it is helpful to think of particles as waves and for other purposes it is better to think of waves as particles.
An important consequence of this is that one can observe what is called interfere between two sets of waves or particles.|An important consequence of this is that one can observe what is called interference between two sets of waves or particles.
A familiar example of interference in the case of light is the colors that are often seen in soapy bubbles.|A familiar example of interference in the case of light is the colors that are often seen in soap bubbles.
These are causative by reflection of light from the two sides of the thin film of water forming the bubble.|These are caused by reflection of light from the two sides of the thin film of water forming the bubble.
White light consists of light waves of all different wavelengths, or colors, For certain wavelengths the crests of the waves reflective from one side of the soap film coincide with the troughs reflective from the other side.|White light consists of light waves of all different wavelengths, or colors, For certain wavelengths the crests of the waves reflected from one side of the soap film coincide with the troughs reflected from the other side.
The colors corresponding to these wavelengths are absent from the reflective light, which therefore appears to be colored.Consider a partition with two narrow parallel slits in it.|The colors corresponding to these wavelengths are absent from the reflected light, which therefore appears to be colored.Consider a partition with two narrow parallel slits in it.
Most of the light will hit the partition, but a small amount will go through the slit.|Most of the light will hit the partition, but a small amount will go through the slits.
Now suppose one places a screen on the farness side of the partition from the light.|Now suppose one places a screen on the far side of the partition from the light.
Any point on the screen will receptive waves from the two slits.|Any point on the screen will receive waves from the two slits.
However, in general, the distance the light has to travel from the source to the screen via the two slits will be difference.|However, in general, the distance the light has to travel from the source to the screen via the two slits will be different.
This will mean that the waves from the slits will not be in phase with each otherness when they arrive at the screen: in some places the waves will cancel each otherness out, and in othernesss they will reinforce each otherness.|This will mean that the waves from the slits will not be in phase with each other when they arrive at the screen: in some places the waves will cancel each other out, and in others they will reinforce each other.
The result is a character pattern of light and dark fringes.|The result is a characteristic pattern of light and dark fringes.
It seems the more peculiar because if one only has one slit, one does not get any fringes, justness a uniform distribution of electrons across the screen.|It seems the more peculiar because if one only has one slit, one does not get any fringes, just a uniform distribution of electrons across the screen.
One might therefore think that open another slit would just increase the number of electrons hitting each point of the screen, but, because of interference, it actually decreases it in some places.|One might therefore think that opening another slit would just increase the number of electrons hitting each point of the screen, but, because of interference, it actually decreases it in some places.
If electrons are sent through the slits one at a time, one would expect each to pass through one slit or the other, and so behave just as if the slit it passed through were the only one there – giving a uniform distribute on the screen.|If electrons are sent through the slits one at a time, one would expect each to pass through one slit or the other, and so behave just as if the slit it passed through were the only one there – giving a uniform distribution on the screen.
In reality, however, even when the electrons are sent one at a time, the fringe still appear.|In reality, however, even when the electrons are sent one at a time, the fringes still appear.
Each electron, therefore, must bepassing through both slits at the sameness time!|Each electron, therefore, must bepassing through both slits at the same time!
The phenomenon of interference between particles has been cruciality to our understanding of the structure of atoms, the basic units of chemistry and biology and the building blocks out of which we, and everything around us, are made.|The phenomenon of interference between particles has been crucial to our understanding of the structure of atoms, the basic units of chemistry and biology and the building blocks out of which we, and everything around us, are made.
At the beginning of this century it was thought that atoms were rather like the planets orbiting the sun, with electrons (particles of negative electric) orbiting around a central nucleus, which carried positive electric.|At the beginning of this century it was thought that atoms were rather like the planets orbiting the sun, with electrons (particles of negative electricity) orbiting around a central nucleus, which carried positive electricity.
The attraction between the positive and negative electricity being supposed to keep the electrons in their orbits in the same way that the gravitational attraction between the sun and the planets keeps the planets in their orbits.|The attraction between the positive and negative electricity was supposed to keep the electrons in their orbits in the same way that the gravitational attraction between the sun and the planets keeps the planets in their orbits.
The trouble with this was that the laws of mechanics and electricity, before quantum mechanics, predicted that the electrons would lose energy and so spiral inward until they collided with the nucleate.|The trouble with this was that the laws of mechanics and electricity, before quantum mechanics, predicted that the electrons would lose energy and so spiral inward until they collided with the nucleus.
This would mean that the atom, and indeed all matter, should rapidly collapsible to a state of very high density.|This would mean that the atom, and indeed all matter, should rapidly collapse to a state of very high density.
He suggested that maybe the electrons were not able to orbit at justness any distance from the central nucleus but only at certain specified distances.|He suggested that maybe the electrons were not able to orbit at just any distance from the central nucleus but only at certain specified distances.
If one also supposed that only one or two electrons could orbit at any one of these distance, this would solve the problem of the collapse of the atom, because the electrons could not spiral in any farther than to fill up the orbits with e least distance and energies.|If one also supposed that only one or two electrons could orbit at any one of these distances, this would solve the problem of the collapse of the atom, because the electrons could not spiral in any farther than to fill up the orbits with e least distances and energies.
This model explained quite well the structure of the simplest atomic, hydrogen, which has only one electron orbiting around the nucleus.|This model explained quite well the structure of the simplest atom, hydrogen, which has only one electron orbiting around the nucleus.
But it was not clear how one ought to extend it to more complicated atomic.|But it was not clear how one ought to extend it to more complicated atoms.
Moreover, the idea of a limited set of allowed orbital seemed very arbitrary.|Moreover, the idea of a limited set of allowed orbits seemed very arbitrary.
The new theoretic of quantum mechanics resolved this difficulty.|The new theory of quantum mechanics resolved this difficulty.
For certain orbital, the length of the orbit would correspond to a whole number (as opposed to a fractional number) of wavelengths of the electron.|For certain orbits, the length of the orbit would correspond to a whole number (as opposed to a fractional number) of wavelengths of the electron.
For these orbital the wave crest would be in the same position each time round, so the waves would add up: these orbital would correspond to Bohr’s allowed orbital.|For these orbits the wave crest would be in the same position each time round, so the waves would add up: these orbits would correspond to Bohr’s allowed orbits.
However, for orbits whose lengths were not a whole number of wavelengths, each wave crest would eventually be canceled out by a trough as the electrons go round; these orbits would not be allowed.A nice way of visualizing the wave/particle duality is the so-called sum over histories introduced by the American scientist Richard Feynman.|However, for orbits whose lengths were not a whole number of wavelengths, each wave crest would eventually be canceled out by a trough as the electrons went round; these orbits would not be allowed.A nice way of visualizing the wave/particle duality is the so-called sum over histories introduced by the American scientist Richard Feynman.
In this approachable the particle is not supposed to have a single history or path in space-time, as it would in a classical, nonquantum theory.|In this approach the particle is not supposed to have a single history or path in space-time, as it would in a classical, nonquantum theory.
Instead it is supposed to go from A to B by every possibleness path.|Instead it is supposed to go from A to B by every possible path.
With each path there are associated a couple of numbers: one represents the size of a wave and the other represents the position in the cycle (i.e., whether it being at a crest or a trough).|With each path there are associated a couple of numbers: one represents the size of a wave and the other represents the position in the cycle (i.e., whether it is at a crest or a trough).
The probability of going from A to B being found by adding up the waves for all the paths.|The probability of going from A to B is found by adding up the waves for all the paths.
In general, if one compare a set of neighboring paths, the phases or positions in the cycle will differ greatly.|In general, if one compares a set of neighboring paths, the phases or positions in the cycle will differ greatly.
This mean that the waves associated with these paths will almost exactly cancel each other out.|This means that the waves associated with these paths will almost exactly cancel each other out.
The waves for these paths will not cancel out Such paths correspond to Bohr’s allowed orbit.|The waves for these paths will not cancel out Such paths correspond to Bohr’s allowed orbits.
With these ideas, in concrete mathematical form, it was relatively straightforward to calculate the allowed orbit in more complicated atoms and even in molecules, which are made up of a number of atoms held together by electrons in orbit that go round more than one nucleus.|With these ideas, in concrete mathematical form, it was relatively straightforward to calculate the allowed orbits in more complicated atoms and even in molecules, which are made up of a number of atoms held together by electrons in orbits that go round more than one nucleus.
Since the structure of molecules and their reactions with each other underlie all of chemistry and biology, quantal mechanics allows us in principle to predict nearly everything we see around us, within the limits set by the uncertainty principle.|Since the structure of molecules and their reactions with each other underlie all of chemistry and biology, quantum mechanics allows us in principle to predict nearly everything we see around us, within the limits set by the uncertainty principle.
(In practice, however, the calculations required for systems containing more than a few electrons are so complicated that we cannot doer them.)|(In practice, however, the calculations required for systems containing more than a few electrons are so complicated that we cannot do them.)
Einstein’s general theory of relative seems to govern the large-scale structure of the universe.|Einstein’s general theory of relativity seems to govern the large-scale structure of the universe.
It is what is call a classical theory; that is, it does not take account of the uncertainty principle of quantum mechanics, as it should for consistency with other theories.|It is what is called a classical theory; that is, it does not take account of the uncertainty principle of quantum mechanics, as it should for consistency with other theories.
The reason that this does not lead to any discrepancy with observation is that all the gravitational fields that we normally experience are very weakness.|The reason that this does not lead to any discrepancy with observation is that all the gravitational fields that we normally experience are very weak.
In such strong fields the effect of quantum mechanics should be important.|In such strong fields the effects of quantum mechanics should be important.
Thus, in a sense, classical general relativity, by predicting points of infinite density, predicts its own downfall, just as classical (that is, nonquantum) mechanics predicted its downfall by suggesting that atomic should collapse to infinite density.|Thus, in a sense, classical general relativity, by predicting points of infinite density, predicts its own downfall, just as classical (that is, nonquantum) mechanics predicted its downfall by suggesting that atoms should collapse to infinite density.
We do not yet have a complete consistent theory that unifies general relativity and quantum mechanics, but we do know a number of the feature it should have.|We do not yet have a complete consistent theory that unifies general relativity and quantum mechanics, but we do know a number of the features it should have.
For the moment, however, we shall turn to the recent attempts to bring together our understanding of the other force of nature into a single, unified quantum theory.Aristotle believed that all the matter in the universe was made up of four basic elements – earth, air, fire, and water.|For the moment, however, we shall turn to the recent attempts to bring together our understanding of the other forces of nature into a single, unified quantum theory.Aristotle believed that all the matter in the universe was made up of four basic elements – earth, air, fire, and water.
These elements were acted on by two forces: gravitate, the tendency for earth and water to sink, and levity, the tendency for air and fire to rise.|These elements were acted on by two forces: gravity, the tendency for earth and water to sink, and levity, the tendency for air and fire to rise.
This divide of the contents of the universe into matter and forces is still used today.|This division of the contents of the universe into matter and forces is still used today.
Aristotle believed that matter was continuous, that is, one could divide a piece of matter into smallness and smallness bits without any limit: one never came up against a grain of matter that could not be divided further.|Aristotle believed that matter was continuous, that is, one could divide a piece of matter into smaller and smaller bits without any limit: one never came up against a grain of matter that could not be divided further.
A few Greeks, however, such as Democritus, held that matter was inherently grainy and that everything was making up of large numbers of various different kinds of atoms.|A few Greeks, however, such as Democritus, held that matter was inherently grainy and that everything was made up of large numbers of various different kinds of atoms.
For centuries the argument continued without any real evidence on either side, but in 1803 the British chemist and physicist John Dalton pointed out that the fact that chemical compounds always combined in certain proportions could be explained by the grouping together of atoms to form units call molecules.|For centuries the argument continued without any real evidence on either side, but in 1803 the British chemist and physicist John Dalton pointed out that the fact that chemical compounds always combined in certain proportions could be explained by the grouping together of atoms to form units called molecules.
However, the argument between the two schools of think was not finally settled in favor of the atomists until the early years of this century.|However, the argument between the two schools of thought was not finally settled in favor of the atomists until the early years of this century.
One of the important pieces of physical evidence being provided by Einstein.|One of the important pieces of physical evidence was provided by Einstein.
In a paper written in 1905, a few weeks before the famous paper on special relativity, Einstein pointed out that what was called Brownian motion – the irregular, random motion of small particles of dust suspended in a liquify – could be explained as the effect of atoms of the liquify colliding with the dust particles.|In a paper written in 1905, a few weeks before the famous paper on special relativity, Einstein pointed out that what was called Brownian motion – the irregular, random motion of small particles of dust suspended in a liquid – could be explained as the effect of atoms of the liquid colliding with the dust particles.
By this time there were already suspicions that these atomise were not, after all, indivisible.|By this time there were already suspicions that these atoms were not, after all, indivisible.
Several years previously a fellow of Trinity College, Cambridge, J. J. Thomson, had demonstrated the existence of a particle of matter, called the electron, that had a mass less than one thousandth of that of the light atom.|Several years previously a fellow of Trinity College, Cambridge, J. J. Thomson, had demonstrated the existence of a particle of matter, called the electron, that had a mass less than one thousandth of that of the lightest atom.
He used a setup rather like a modern TV picture tubal: a red-hot metal filament gave off the electrons, and because these have a negative electric charge, an electric field could be used to accelerate them toward a phosphor-coated screen.|He used a setup rather like a modern TV picture tube: a red-hot metal filament gave off the electrons, and because these have a negative electric charge, an electric field could be used to accelerate them toward a phosphor-coated screen.
When they hit the screen, flashes of light were generative.|When they hit the screen, flashes of light were generated.
Soon it was realized that these electrons must being coming from within the atoms themselves, and in 1911 the New Zealand physicist Ernest Rutherford finally showed that the atoms of matter do have internal structure: they are made up of an extremely tiny, positively charged nucleus, around which a numbeingr of electrons orbit.|Soon it was realized that these electrons must be coming from within the atoms themselves, and in 1911 the New Zealand physicist Ernest Rutherford finally showed that the atoms of matter do have internal structure: they are made up of an extremely tiny, positively charged nucleus, around which a number of electrons orbit.
He deduced this by analysis the way in which alpha-particles, which are positively charged particles given off by radioactive atoms, are deflected when they collide with atoms.|He deduced this by analyzing the way in which alpha-particles, which are positively charged particles given off by radioactive atoms, are deflected when they collide with atoms.
At first it was thought that the nucleus of the atom was made up of electrons and different numerical of a positively charged particle called the proton, from the Greek word meaning “first,” because it was believed to be the fundamental unit from which matter was made.|At first it was thought that the nucleus of the atom was made up of electrons and different numbers of a positively charged particle called the proton, from the Greek word meaning “first,” because it was believed to be the fundamental unit from which matter was made.
However, in 1932 a colleague of Rutherford’s at Cambridge, James Chadwick, discovery that the nucleus contained another particle, called the neutron, which had almost the same mass as a proton but no electrical charge.|However, in 1932 a colleague of Rutherford’s at Cambridge, James Chadwick, discovered that the nucleus contained another particle, called the neutron, which had almost the same mass as a proton but no electrical charge.
Chadwick received the Nobel Prize for his discovery, and was elected Master of Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge (the collegial of which I am now a fellow).|Chadwick received the Nobel Prize for his discovery, and was elected Master of Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge (the college of which I am now a fellow).
There had been a bitter dispute in the college ever since a group of young Fellows return after the war had voted many of the old Fellows out of the college offices they had held for a long time.|There had been a bitter dispute in the college ever since a group of young Fellows returning after the war had voted many of the old Fellows out of the college offices they had held for a long time.
This was before my time; I joined the college in 1965 at the tail end of the bitterness, when similar disagreements forced another Nobel Prize – winner Master, Sir Nevill Mott, to resign.|This was before my time; I joined the college in 1965 at the tail end of the bitterness, when similar disagreements forced another Nobel Prize – winning Master, Sir Nevill Mott, to resign.
Up to about thirty years ago, it was think that protons and neutrons were “elementary” particles, but experiments in which protons were collided with other protons or electrons at high speeds indicated that they were in fact made up of smaller particles.|Up to about thirty years ago, it was thought that protons and neutrons were “elementary” particles, but experiments in which protons were collided with other protons or electrons at high speeds indicated that they were in fact made up of smaller particles.
The origin of the name being an enigmatic quotation from James Joyce: “Three quarks for Muster Mark!” The word quark being supposed to be pronounced like quart, but with a k at the end instead of a t, but being usually pronounced to rhyme with lark.|The origin of the name is an enigmatic quotation from James Joyce: “Three quarks for Muster Mark!” The word quark is supposed to be pronounced like quart, but with a k at the end instead of a t, but is usually pronounced to rhyme with lark.
There are a number of differ varieties of quarks: there are six “flavors,” which we call up, down, strange, charmed, bottom, and top.|There are a number of different varieties of quarks: there are six “flavors,” which we call up, down, strange, charmed, bottom, and top.
The first three flavors have been known since the 1960s but the charmed quark was discovered only in 1974, the bottom in 1977, and the top in 1995.|The first three flavors had been known since the 1960s but the charmed quark was discovered only in 1974, the bottom in 1977, and the top in 1995.
Each flavor comes in three “color,” red, green, and blue.|Each flavor comes in three “colors,” red, green, and blue.
(It should be emphasizing that these terms are just labels: quarks are much smaller than the wavelength of visible light and so do not have any color in the normal sense.|(It should be emphasized that these terms are just labels: quarks are much smaller than the wavelength of visible light and so do not have any color in the normal sense.
It is just that modern physicists seem to have more imaginative ways of naming new particles and phenomena – they no long restrict themselves to Greek!)|It is just that modern physicists seem to have more imaginative ways of naming new particles and phenomena – they no longer restrict themselves to Greek!)
A proton or neutron being made up of three quarks, one of each color.|A proton or neutron is made up of three quarks, one of each color.
A proton contains two up quarks and one downer quark; a neutron contains two downer and one up.|A proton contains two up quarks and one down quark; a neutron contains two down and one up.
We can creative particles made up of the other quarks (strange, charmed, bottom, and top), but these all have a much greater mass and decay very rapidly into protons and neutrons.We now know that neither the atoms nor the protons and neutrons within them are indivisible.|We can create particles made up of the other quarks (strange, charmed, bottom, and top), but these all have a much greater mass and decay very rapidly into protons and neutrons.We now know that neither the atoms nor the protons and neutrons within them are indivisible.
So the question is: what are the truly elementary particles, the basic building blocks from which everything is making?|So the question is: what are the truly elementary particles, the basic building blocks from which everything is made?
We need to use something with a much smallness wave-length.|We need to use something with a much smaller wave-length.
As we saw in the last chapter, quantum mechanics tells us that all particles are in fact waves, and that the high the energy of a particle, the smaller the wavelength of the corresponding wave.|As we saw in the last chapter, quantum mechanics tells us that all particles are in fact waves, and that the higher the energy of a particle, the smaller the wavelength of the corresponding wave.
So the best answer we can give to our question depends on how high a particle energy we have at our dispose, because this determines on how small a length scale we can look.|So the best answer we can give to our question depends on how high a particle energy we have at our disposal, because this determines on how small a length scale we can look.
These particle energies are usually measured in units called electron voltaic.|These particle energies are usually measured in units called electron volts.
(In Thomson’s experiment with electrons, we saw that he used an electric field to accelerate the electrons.|(In Thomson’s experiments with electrons, we saw that he used an electric field to accelerate the electrons.
The energy that an electron gains from an electricity field of one volt is what is known as an electron volt.)|The energy that an electron gains from an electric field of one volt is what is known as an electron volt.)
In the nineteenth century, when the only particle energies that people knew how to use were the low energies of a few electron volts generated by chemical reactions such as burning, it was thought that atoms were the smallness unit.|In the nineteenth century, when the only particle energies that people knew how to use were the low energies of a few electron volts generated by chemical reactions such as burning, it was thought that atoms were the smallest unit.
In Rutherford’s experiment, the alpha-particles had energize of millions of electron volts.|In Rutherford’s experiment, the alpha-particles had energies of millions of electron volts.
More recently, we have learned how to use electromagnetic fields to giving particles energies of at first millions and then thousands of millions of electron volts.|More recently, we have learned how to use electromagnetic fields to give particles energies of at first millions and then thousands of millions of electron volts.
And so we know that particles that were thought to be “element” thirty years ago are, in fact, made up of smaller particles.|And so we know that particles that were thought to be “elementary” thirty years ago are, in fact, made up of smaller particles.
May these, as we go to still higher energies, in turn be found to be made from still smallness particles?|May these, as we go to still higher energies, in turn be found to be made from still smaller particles?
This is certainly possible, but we do have some theoretical reasons for believing that we have, or are very near to, a knowledge of the ultimate build blocks of nature.|This is certainly possible, but we do have some theoretical reasons for believing that we have, or are very near to, a knowledge of the ultimate building blocks of nature.
Using the wave/particle duality discussant in the last chapter, every-thing in the universe, including light and gravity, can be described in terms of particles.|Using the wave/particle duality discussed in the last chapter, every-thing in the universe, including light and gravity, can be described in terms of particles.
One way of thinking of spin is to imagine the particles as little top spinning about an axis.|One way of thinking of spin is to imagine the particles as little tops spinning about an axis.
However, this can being misleading, beingcause quantum mechanics tells us that the particles do not have any well-defined axis.|However, this can be misleading, because quantum mechanics tells us that the particles do not have any well-defined axis.
What the spin of a particle really tells us is what the particle look like from different directions.|What the spin of a particle really tells us is what the particle looks like from different directions.
On the other hand, a particle of spin 1 is like an arrow: it looks differ from differ directions Figure 5:1-ii.|On the other hand, a particle of spin 1 is like an arrow: it looks different from different directions Figure 5:1-ii.
A particle of spin 2 is like a double-headed arrow Figure 5:1-iii: it looks the sameness if one turns it round half a revolution (180 degrees).|A particle of spin 2 is like a double-headed arrow Figure 5:1-iii: it looks the same if one turns it round half a revolution (180 degrees).
All the known particles in the universe can be divided into two groups: particles of spin 1⁄2, which make up the matter in the universe, and particles of spin 0, 1, and 2, which, as we shall see, give rise to force between the matter particles.|All the known particles in the universe can be divided into two groups: particles of spin 1⁄2, which make up the matter in the universe, and particles of spin 0, 1, and 2, which, as we shall see, give rise to forces between the matter particles.
This was discovered in 1925 by an Austrian physicist, Wolfgang Pauli – for which he reception the Nobel Prize in 1945.|This was discovered in 1925 by an Austrian physicist, Wolfgang Pauli – for which he received the Nobel Prize in 1945.
He was the archetypal theoretical physicist: it was said of him that even his presence in the same town would make experiments go wrongness!|He was the archetypal theoretical physicist: it was said of him that even his presence in the same town would make experiments go wrong!
Pauli’s exclusion principle says that two similarity particles can-not exist in the same state; that is, they cannot have both the same position and the same velocity, within the limits given by the uncertainty principle.|Pauli’s exclusion principle says that two similar particles can-not exist in the same state; that is, they cannot have both the same position and the same velocity, within the limits given by the uncertainty principle.
The exclusion principle is crucial because it explains why matter particles do not collapse to a state of very high density under the influence of the forces produced by the particles of spin 0, 1, and 2: if the matter particles have very nearly the same position, they must have different velocities, which means that they will not stay in the same position for long.|The exclusion principle is crucial because it explains why matter particles do not collapse to a state of very high density under the influence of the forces produced by the particles of spin 0, 1, and 2: if the matter particles have very nearly the same positions, they must have different velocities, which means that they will not stay in the same position for long.
If the worldly had been created without the exclusion principle, quarks would not form separate, well-defined protons and neutrons.|If the world had been created without the exclusion principle, quarks would not form separate, well-defined protons and neutrons.
Nor would these, togetherness with electrons, form separate, well-defined atoms.|Nor would these, together with electrons, form separate, well-defined atoms.
They would all collapse to form a roughly uniform, dense “soup.” A proper understanding of the electron and other spin-1⁄2 particles did not come until 1928, when a theory was proposed by Paul Dirac, who later was elective to the Lucasian Professorship of Mathematics at Cambridge (the same professorship that Newton had once held and that I now hold).|They would all collapse to form a roughly uniform, dense “soup.” A proper understanding of the electron and other spin-1⁄2 particles did not come until 1928, when a theory was proposed by Paul Dirac, who later was elected to the Lucasian Professorship of Mathematics at Cambridge (the same professorship that Newton had once held and that I now hold).
Dirac’s theory being the first of its kind that being consistent with both quantum mechanics and the special theory of relativity.|Dirac’s theory was the first of its kind that was consistent with both quantum mechanics and the special theory of relativity.
It explained mathematically why the electron had spin-1⁄2; that is, why it didn’t look the same if you turned it through only one complete revolution, but did if you turned it through two revolutionary.|It explained mathematically why the electron had spin-1⁄2; that is, why it didn’t look the same if you turned it through only one complete revolution, but did if you turned it through two revolutions.
The discover of the positron in 1932 confirmed Dirac’s theory and led to his being awarded the Nobel Prize for physics in 1933.|The discovery of the positron in 1932 confirmed Dirac’s theory and led to his being awarded the Nobel Prize for physics in 1933.
We now knowable that every particle has an antiparticle, with which it can annihilate.|We now know that every particle has an antiparticle, with which it can annihilate.
The question of why there seem to be so many more particles than antiparticles around us is extremelyimportant, and I shall return to it later in the chapter.They were just getting their clutch ready for the spring sitting, and they protested that to take the eggs away now was murder.|The question of why there seem to be so many more particles than antiparticles around us is extremelyimportant, and I shall return to it later in the chapter.They were just getting their clutches ready for the spring sitting, and they protested that to take the eggs away now was murder.
Led by three young Black Minorca pullets, the hens made a determination effort to thwart Napoleon’s wishes.|Led by three young Black Minorca pullets, the hens made a determined effort to thwart Napoleon’s wishes.
Their method was to fly up to the rafters and there lay their eggs, which smash to pieces on the floor.|Their method was to fly up to the rafters and there lay their eggs, which smashed to pieces on the floor.
He ordered the hens’ ration to be stopped, and decreed that any animal giving so much as a grain of corn to a hen should be punished by death.|He ordered the hens’ rations to be stopped, and decreed that any animal giving so much as a grain of corn to a hen should be punished by death.
The dogs saw to it that these orders being carried out.|The dogs saw to it that these orders were carried out.
For five days the hens held out, then they capitulated and went back to their nest boxes.|For five days the hens held out, then they capitulated and went back to their nesting boxes.
Their bodies were buried in the orchard, and it was given out that they had dying of coccidiosis.|Their bodies were buried in the orchard, and it was given out that they had died of coccidiosis.
Whymper heard nothing of this affair, and the eggs were duly delivery, a grocer’s van driving up to the farm once a week to take them away.|Whymper heard nothing of this affair, and the eggs were duly delivered, a grocer’s van driving up to the farm once a week to take them away.
He was rumoured to being hiding on one of the neighbouring farms, either Foxwood or Pinchfield.|He was rumoured to be hiding on one of the neighbouring farms, either Foxwood or Pinchfield.
It happened that there being in the yard a pile of timber which had been stacked there ten years earlier when a beech spinney being cleared.|It happened that there was in the yard a pile of timber which had been stacked there ten years earlier when a beech spinney was cleared.
It was well seasoned, and Whymper had advised Napoleon to sell it; both Mr. Pilkington and Mr. Frederick being anxious to buy it.|It was well seasoned, and Whymper had advised Napoleon to sell it; both Mr. Pilkington and Mr. Frederick were anxious to buy it.
It was noticed that whenever he seemed on the point of coming to an agreement with Frederick, Snowball was declaration to be in hiding at Foxwood, while, when he inclined toward Pilkington, Snowball was said to be at Pinchfield.|It was noticed that whenever he seemed on the point of coming to an agreement with Frederick, Snowball was declared to be in hiding at Foxwood, while, when he inclined toward Pilkington, Snowball was said to be at Pinchfield.
Suddenly, early in the spring, an alarm thing was discovered.|Suddenly, early in the spring, an alarming thing was discovered.
The animalise were so disturbed that they could hardly sleep in their stalls.|The animals were so disturbed that they could hardly sleep in their stalls.
Every night, it was said, he came creeping in under cover of darkness and performed all kind of mischief.|Every night, it was said, he came creeping in under cover of darkness and performed all kinds of mischief.
He stole the corn, he upset the milk-pails, he broke the eggs, he trampler the seedbeds, he gnawed the bark off the fruit trees.|He stole the corn, he upset the milk-pails, he broke the eggs, he trampled the seedbeds, he gnawed the bark off the fruit trees.
Whenever anything go wrong it became usual to attribute it to Snowball.|Whenever anything went wrong it became usual to attribute it to Snowball.
If a window was broken or a drain was blocked up, someone was certain to say that Snowball had come in the night and done it, and when the key of the store-shed was losings, the whole farm was convinced that Snowball had thrown it down the well.|If a window was broken or a drain was blocked up, someone was certain to say that Snowball had come in the night and done it, and when the key of the store-shed was lost, the whole farm was convinced that Snowball had thrown it down the well.
Curiously enough, they went on believable this even after the mislaid key was found under a sack of meal.|Curiously enough, they went on believing this even after the mislaid key was found under a sack of meal.
The cows declarative unanimously that Snowball crept into their stalls and milked them in their sleep.|The cows declared unanimously that Snowball crept into their stalls and milked them in their sleep.
The rat, which had been troublesome that winter, were also said to be in league with Snowball.|The rats, which had been troublesome that winter, were also said to be in league with Snowball.
He snuffed in every corner, in the barn, in the cow-shed, in the henhouses, in the vegetable garden, and found trace of Snowball almost everywhere.|He snuffed in every corner, in the barn, in the cow-shed, in the henhouses, in the vegetable garden, and found traces of Snowball almost everywhere.
The animals were thoroughly frightening.|The animals were thoroughly frightened.
It seemed to them as though Snowball were some kind of invisible influence, pervading the air about them and menace them with all kinds of dangers.|It seemed to them as though Snowball were some kind of invisible influence, pervading the air about them and menacing them with all kinds of dangers.
In the even Squealer called them together, and with an alarmed expression on his face told them that he had some serious news to report.|In the evening Squealer called them together, and with an alarmed expression on his face told them that he had some serious news to report.
“Comrades!” crying Squealer, making little nervous skips, “a most terrible thing has been discovered.|“Comrades!” cried Squealer, making little nervous skips, “a most terrible thing has been discovered.
Snowball has sold himself to Frederick of Pinchfield Farm, who is evenness now plotting to attack us and take our farm away from us!|Snowball has sold himself to Frederick of Pinchfield Farm, who is even now plotting to attack us and take our farm away from us!
But there is bad than that.|But there is worse than that.
We had thought that Snowball’s rebellion being caused simply by his vanity and ambition.|We had thought that Snowball’s rebellion was caused simply by his vanity and ambition.
doer you know what the real reason was?|Do you know what the real reason was?
He was Jones’s secret agential all the time.|He was Jones’s secret agent all the time.
It has all been proved by documentary which he left behind him and which we have only just discovered.|It has all been proved by documents which he left behind him and which we have only just discovered.
Did we not see for ourselves how he attempter — fortunately without success — to get us defeated and destroyed at the Battle of the Cowshed?” The animals were stupefied.|Did we not see for ourselves how he attempted — fortunately without success — to get us defeated and destroyed at the Battle of the Cowshed?” The animals were stupefied.
This was a wickedness farness outdoing Snowball’s destruction of the windmill.|This was a wickedness far outdoing Snowball’s destruction of the windmill.
They all remembered, or thought they remembered, how they had seeing Snowball charging ahead of them at the Battle of the Cowshed, how he had rallied and encouraged them at every turn, and how he had not paused for an instant even when the pellets from Jones’s gun had wounded his back.|They all remembered, or thought they remembered, how they had seen Snowball charging ahead of them at the Battle of the Cowshed, how he had rallied and encouraged them at every turn, and how he had not paused for an instant even when the pellets from Jones’s gun had wounded his back.
At first it was a little difficult to seeing how this fitted in with his being on Jones’s side.|At first it was a little difficult to see how this fitted in with his being on Jones’s side.
Even Boxer, who seldom asked questions, being puzzled.|Even Boxer, who seldom asked questions, was puzzled.
He lay down, tucked his fore hoofs beneath him, shut his eye, and with a hard effort managed to formulate his thoughts.|He lay down, tucked his fore hoofs beneath him, shut his eyes, and with a hard effort managed to formulate his thoughts.
“I do not believer that,” he said.|“I do not believe that,” he said.
For we knowable now — it is all written down in the secret documents that we have found— that in reality he was trying to lure us to our doom.” “But he was wounded,” said Boxer.|For we know now — it is all written down in the secret documents that we have found— that in reality he was trying to lure us to our doom.” “But he was wounded,” said Boxer.
I could show you this in his own writing, if you being able to read it.|I could show you this in his own writing, if you were able to read it.
The plot was for Snowball, at the critic moment, to give the signal for flight and leave the field to the enemy.|The plot was for Snowball, at the critical moment, to give the signal for flight and leave the field to the enemy.
And he very nearly successor — I will even say, comrades, he WOULD have successor if it had not been for our heroic Leader, Comrade Napoleon.|And he very nearly succeeded — I will even say, comrades, he WOULD have succeeded if it had not been for our heroic Leader, Comrade Napoleon.
doer you not remember how, just at the moment when Jones and his men had got inside the yard, Snowball suddenly turned and fled, and many animals followed him?|Do you not remember how, just at the moment when Jones and his men had got inside the yard, Snowball suddenly turned and fled, and many animals followed him?
And do you not remembrance, too, that it was just at that moment, when panic was spreading and all seemed lost, that Comrade Napoleon sprang forward with a cry of ‘Death to Humanity!’ and sank his teeth in Jones’s leg?|And do you not remember, too, that it was just at that moment, when panic was spreading and all seemed lost, that Comrade Napoleon sprang forward with a cry of ‘Death to Humanity!’ and sank his teeth in Jones’s leg?
Surely you remember THAT, comrades?”exclaimed squeal, frisking from side to side.|Surely you remember THAT, comrades?”exclaimed Squealer, frisking from side to side.
Now when Squealer described the scene so graphically, it seemed to the animalise that they did remember it.|Now when Squealer described the scene so graphically, it seemed to the animals that they did remember it.
At any rate, they remembered that at the critical moment of the battle Snowball had turner to flee.|At any rate, they remembered that at the critical moment of the battle Snowball had turned to flee.
But box was still a little uneasy.|But Boxer was still a little uneasy.
“I do not believer that Snowball was a traitor at the beginning,” he said finally.|“I do not believe that Snowball was a traitor at the beginning,” he said finally.
“What he has doer since is different.|“What he has done since is different.
But I believe that at the Battle of the Cowshed he was a good comrade.” “Our Leader, Comrade Napoleon,” announcer Squealer, speaking very slowly and firmly, “has stated categorically —categorically, comrade — that Snowball was Jones’s agent from the very beginning — yes, and from long before the Rebellion was ever thought of.” “Ah, that is different!” said Boxer.|But I believe that at the Battle of the Cowshed he was a good comrade.” “Our Leader, Comrade Napoleon,” announced Squealer, speaking very slowly and firmly, “has stated categorically —categorically, comrade — that Snowball was Jones’s agent from the very beginning — yes, and from long before the Rebellion was ever thought of.” “Ah, that is different!” said Boxer.
“If Comrade Napoleon says it, it must be right.” “That is the true spirit, comrade!” cried Squealer, but it was noticed he cast a very ugly look at Boxer with his little twinkling eye.|“If Comrade Napoleon says it, it must be right.” “That is the true spirit, comrade!” cried Squealer, but it was noticed he cast a very ugly look at Boxer with his little twinkling eyes.
He turned to go, then paused and added impressively: “I warn every animal on this farm to keep his eyes very wideness open.|He turned to go, then paused and added impressively: “I warn every animal on this farm to keep his eyes very wide open.
When they were all gathered together, Napoleon emerged from the farmhouse, wearing both his medals (for he had recently awarded himself“animalise Hero, First Class”, and “animalise Hero, Second Class”), with his nine huge dogs frisking round him and uttering growls that sent shivers down all the animals’ spines.|When they were all gathered together, Napoleon emerged from the farmhouse, wearing both his medals (for he had recently awarded himself“Animal Hero, First Class”, and “Animal Hero, Second Class”), with his nine huge dogs frisking round him and uttering growls that sent shivers down all the animals’ spines.
They all cowered silently in their places, seeming to knowable in advance that some terrible thing was about to happen.|They all cowered silently in their places, seeming to know in advance that some terrible thing was about to happen.
Immediately the dogs bounded forwardness, seized four of the pigs by the ear and dragged them, squealing with pain and terror, to Napoleon’s feet.|Immediately the dogs bounded forward, seized four of the pigs by the ear and dragged them, squealing with pain and terror, to Napoleon’s feet.
The pigs’ ears were bleed, the dogs had tasted blood, and for a few moments they appeared to go quite mad.|The pigs’ ears were bleeding, the dogs had tasted blood, and for a few moments they appeared to go quite mad.
Boxer saw them coming and put out his greatness hoof, caught a dog in mid-air, and pinned him to the ground.|Boxer saw them coming and put out his great hoof, caught a dog in mid-air, and pinned him to the ground.
Boxer looked at Napoleon to know whether he should crush the dog to die or let it go.|Boxer looked at Napoleon to know whether he should crush the dog to death or let it go.
Napoleon appeared to change countenance, and sharply ordered Boxer to let the dog go, whereat Boxer lifted his hoof, and the dog slunk away, bruise and howling.|Napoleon appeared to change countenance, and sharply ordered Boxer to let the dog go, whereat Boxer lifted his hoof, and the dog slunk away, bruised and howling.
Presently the tumult died downer.|Presently the tumult died down.
They were the same four pigs as had protestation when Napoleon abolished the Sunday Meetings.|They were the same four pigs as had protested when Napoleon abolished the Sunday Meetings.
Without any far prompting they confessed that they had been secretly in touch with Snowball ever since his expulsion, that they had collaborated with him in destroying the windmill, and that they had entered into an agreement with him to hand over Animal Farm to Mr. Frederick.|Without any further prompting they confessed that they had been secretly in touch with Snowball ever since his expulsion, that they had collaborated with him in destroying the windmill, and that they had entered into an agreement with him to hand over Animal Farm to Mr. Frederick.
They added that Snowball have privately admitted to them that he have been Jones’s secret agent for years past.|They added that Snowball had privately admitted to them that he had been Jones’s secret agent for years past.
When they had finished their confession, the dogs promptly tore their throats out, and in a terrible voice Napoleon demanded whether any other animalise had anything to confess.|When they had finished their confession, the dogs promptly tore their throats out, and in a terrible voice Napoleon demanded whether any other animal had anything to confess.
The three hens who had been the ringleaders in the attempted rebellion over the eggs now coming forward and stated that Snowball had appeared to them in a dream and incited them to disobey Napoleon’s orders.|The three hens who had been the ringleaders in the attempted rebellion over the eggs now came forward and stated that Snowball had appeared to them in a dream and incited them to disobey Napoleon’s orders.
They, too, being slaughtered.|They, too, were slaughtered.
Then a goose came forward and confessed to have secreted six ears of corn during the last year’s harvest and eaten them in the night.|Then a goose came forward and confessed to having secreted six ears of corn during the last year’s harvest and eaten them in the night.
Then a sheep confessor to having urinated in the drinking pool — urged to do this, so she said, by Snowball — and two other sheep confessor to having murdered an old ram, an especially devoted follower of Napoleon, by chasing him round and round a bonfire when he was suffering from a cough.|Then a sheep confessed to having urinated in the drinking pool — urged to do this, so she said, by Snowball — and two other sheep confessed to having murdered an old ram, an especially devoted follower of Napoleon, by chasing him round and round a bonfire when he was suffering from a cough.
And so the tale of confessions and executions go on, until there was a pile of corpses lying before Napoleon’s feet and the air was heavy with the smell of blood, which had been unknown there since the expulsion of Jones.|And so the tale of confessions and executions went on, until there was a pile of corpses lying before Napoleon’s feet and the air was heavy with the smell of blood, which had been unknown there since the expulsion of Jones.
When it was all over, the remaining animals, except for the pig and dogs, crept away in a body.|When it was all over, the remaining animals, except for the pigs and dogs, crept away in a body.
They were shaken and miserableness.|They were shaken and miserable.
They did not know which was more shocking — the treachery of the animals who had leagued themselves with Snowball, or the cruel retribution they had just witness.|They did not know which was more shocking — the treachery of the animals who had leagued themselves with Snowball, or the cruel retribution they had just witnessed.
In the old days there had often been scenes of bloodshed equally terrible, but it seemed to all of them that it was farness worse now that it was happening among themselves.|In the old days there had often been scenes of bloodshed equally terrible, but it seemed to all of them that it was far worse now that it was happening among themselves.
Since Jones have left the farm, until today, no animal have killed another animal.|Since Jones had left the farm, until today, no animal had killed another animal.
Not even a rat have been killed.|Not even a rat had been killed.
They had made their way on to the littleness knoll where the halffinished windmill stood, and with one accord they all lay down as though huddling together for warmth — Clover, Muriel, Benjamin, the cows, the sheep, and a whole flock of geese and hens — everyone, indeed, except the cat, who had suddenly disappeared just before Napoleon ordered the animals to assemble.|They had made their way on to the little knoll where the halffinished windmill stood, and with one accord they all lay down as though huddling together for warmth — Clover, Muriel, Benjamin, the cows, the sheep, and a whole flock of geese and hens — everyone, indeed, except the cat, who had suddenly disappeared just before Napoleon ordered the animals to assemble.
Only Boxer remained on his foot.|Only Boxer remained on his feet.
He fidgeted to and fro, swishing his longness black tail against his sides and occasionally uttering a little whinny of surprise.|He fidgeted to and fro, swishing his long black tail against his sides and occasionally uttering a little whinny of surprise.
I would not have believer that such things could happen on our farm.|I would not have believed that such things could happen on our farm.
The solve, as I see it, is to work harder.|The solution, as I see it, is to work harder.
From now onwards I shall get up a fullness hour earlier in the mornings.” And he moved off at his lumbering trot and made for the quarry.|From now onwards I shall get up a full hour earlier in the mornings.” And he moved off at his lumbering trot and made for the quarry.
Having got there, he collected two successive loads of stone and drag them down to the windmill before retiring for the night.|Having got there, he collected two successive loads of stone and dragged them down to the windmill before retiring for the night.
The animalise huddled about Clover, not speaking.|The animals huddled about Clover, not speaking.
The knoll where they being lying gave them a wide prospect across the countryside.|The knoll where they were lying gave them a wide prospect across the countryside.
Most of Animal Farm being within their view — the long pasture stretching down to the main road, the hayfield, the spinney, the drinking pool, the ploughed fields where the young wheat being thick and green, and the red roofs of the farm buildings with the smoke curling from the chimneys.|Most of Animal Farm was within their view — the long pasture stretching down to the main road, the hayfield, the spinney, the drinking pool, the ploughed fields where the young wheat was thick and green, and the red roofs of the farm buildings with the smoke curling from the chimneys.
The grass and the bursting hedge were gilded by the level rays of the sun.|The grass and the bursting hedges were gilded by the level rays of the sun.
Never had the farm — and with a kind of surprise they remembered that it was their own farm, every inch of it their own property — appearance to the animals so desirable a place.|Never had the farm — and with a kind of surprise they remembered that it was their own farm, every inch of it their own property — appeared to the animals so desirable a place.
As Clover looked down the hillside her eyes filling with tears.|As Clover looked down the hillside her eyes filled with tears.
If she could have spoken her thoughts, it would have been to say that this was not what they had aimed at when they had set themselves years ago to work for the overthrow of the human racial.|If she could have spoken her thoughts, it would have been to say that this was not what they had aimed at when they had set themselves years ago to work for the overthrow of the human race.
These scenes of terror and slaughter were not what they had looked forwardness to on that night when old Major first stirred them to rebellion.|These scenes of terror and slaughter were not what they had looked forward to on that night when old Major first stirred them to rebellion.
If she herself had had any pictural of the future, it had been of a society of animals set free from hunger and the whip, all equal, each working according to his capacity, the strong protecting the weak, as she had protected the lost brood of ducklings with her foreleg on the night of Major’s speech.|If she herself had had any picture of the future, it had been of a society of animals set free from hunger and the whip, all equal, each working according to his capacity, the strong protecting the weak, as she had protected the lost brood of ducklings with her foreleg on the night of Major’s speech.
Instead — she did not know why — they had come to a time when no one dared speak his mind, when fierce, growling dogs roamed everywhere, and when you had to watch your comrades torn to pieces after confessing to shocking incriminate.|Instead — she did not know why — they had come to a time when no one dared speak his mind, when fierce, growling dogs roamed everywhere, and when you had to watch your comrades torn to pieces after confessing to shocking crimes.
There was no thought of rebel or disobedience in her mind.|There was no thought of rebellion or disobedience in her mind.
She knew that, even as things were, they were far better off than they have been in the days of Jones, and that before all else it was needful to prevent the return of the human beings.|She knew that, even as things were, they were far better off than they had been in the days of Jones, and that before all else it was needful to prevent the return of the human beings.
Whatever happened she would remain faithful, work hard, carry out the orders that were giving to her, and accept the leadership of Napoleon.|Whatever happened she would remain faithful, work hard, carry out the orders that were given to her, and accept the leadership of Napoleon.
But still, it was not for this that she and all the other animals had hop and toiled.|But still, it was not for this that she and all the other animals had hoped and toiled.
It was not for this that they had built the windmill and facing the bullets of Jones’s gun.|It was not for this that they had built the windmill and faced the bullets of Jones’s gun.
Such were her thoughts, though she lacked the word to express them.|Such were her thoughts, though she lacked the words to express them.
At last, feeling this to be in some way a substitute for the words she being unable to find, she began to sing ‘Beasts of England’.|At last, feeling this to be in some way a substitute for the words she was unable to find, she began to sing ‘Beasts of England’.
They had just finished singing it for the third time when Squealer, attended by two dogs, approachable them with the air of having something important to say.|They had just finished singing it for the third time when Squealer, attended by two dogs, approached them with the air of having something important to say.
He announced that, by a special decree of Comrade Napoleonic, ‘Beasts of England’ had been abolished.|He announced that, by a special decree of Comrade Napoleon, ‘Beasts of England’ had been abolished.
From now onwards it being forbidden to sing it.|From now onwards it was forbidden to sing it.
The animalise were taken aback.|The animals were taken aback.
“Why?” crying Muriel.|“Why?” cried Muriel.
“It’s no long needed, comrade,” said Squealer stiffly.|“It’s no longer needed, comrade,” said Squealer stiffly.
The execution of the traitors this afternoon was the final actable.|The execution of the traitors this afternoon was the final act.
The enemy both external and internal has been defeat.|The enemy both external and internal has been defeated.
In ‘Beasts of England’ we expressed our longing for a wellness society in days to come.|In ‘Beasts of England’ we expressed our longing for a better society in days to come.
But that societal has now been established.|But that society has now been established.
Clearly this song has no long any purpose.” Frightened though they were, some of the animals might possibly have protested, but at this moment the sheep set up their usual bleating of “Four legs good, two legs bad,” which went on for several minutes and put an end to the discussion.|Clearly this song has no longer any purpose.” Frightened though they were, some of the animals might possibly have protested, but at this moment the sheep set up their usual bleating of “Four legs good, two legs bad,” which went on for several minutes and put an end to the discussion.
In its place Minimus, the poetic, had composed another song which began: Animal Farm, Animal Farm, Never through me shalt thou come to harm!|In its place Minimus, the poet, had composed another song which began: Animal Farm, Animal Farm, Never through me shalt thou come to harm!
A few days later, when the terror caused by the executions had died down, some of the animals remembrance — or thought they remembrance — that the Sixth Commandment decreed “No animal shall kill any other animal.”And though no one cared to mention it in the hearing of the pigs or the dogs, it was felt that the killings which had taken place did not square with this.|A few days later, when the terror caused by the executions had died down, some of the animals remembered — or thought they remembered — that the Sixth Commandment decreed “No animal shall kill any other animal.”And though no one cared to mention it in the hearing of the pigs or the dogs, it was felt that the killings which had taken place did not square with this.
Clover asked Benjamin to read her the Sixth Commandment, and when Benjamin, as usual, said that he refused to meddle in such matter, she fetched Muriel.|Clover asked Benjamin to read her the Sixth Commandment, and when Benjamin, as usual, said that he refused to meddle in such matters, she fetched Muriel.
It ran:“No animal shall kill any otherness animal WITHOUT CAUSE.” Somehow or otherness, the last two words had slipped out of the animals’ memory.|It ran:“No animal shall kill any other animal WITHOUT CAUSE.” Somehow or other, the last two words had slipped out of the animals’ memory.
But they saw now that the Commandment had not been violated; for clearly there was goodness reason for killing the traitors who had leagued themselves with Snowball.|But they saw now that the Commandment had not been violated; for clearly there was good reason for killing the traitors who had leagued themselves with Snowball.
There were times when it seemed to the animals that they worked longer hours and fed no well than they had done in Jones’s day.|There were times when it seemed to the animals that they worked longer hours and fed no better than they had done in Jones’s day.
On Sunday mornings Squealer, holding down a longness strip of paper with his trotter, would read out to them lists of figures proving that the production of every class of foodstuff had increased by two hundred per cent, three hundred per cent, or five hundred per cent, as the case might be.|On Sunday mornings Squealer, holding down a long strip of paper with his trotter, would read out to them lists of figures proving that the production of every class of foodstuff had increased by two hundred per cent, three hundred per cent, or five hundred per cent, as the case might be.
The animals saw no reason to disbelieve him, especially as they could no longer remember very clearly what conditions had been like before the rebel.|The animals saw no reason to disbelieve him, especially as they could no longer remember very clearly what conditions had been like before the Rebellion.
All the same, there were days when they felt that they would sooner have had less figure and more food.|All the same, there were days when they felt that they would sooner have had less figures and more food.
All orders were now issue through Squealer or one of the other pigs.|All orders were now issued through Squealer or one of the other pigs.
Napoleon himself was not seeing in public as often as once in a fortnight.|Napoleon himself was not seen in public as often as once in a fortnight.
When he did appear, he was attended not only by his retinue of dogs but by a black cockerel who marched in front of him and acted as a kind of trumpeter, letting out a loud “cock-a-doodle-doo” before Napoleonic spoke.|When he did appear, he was attended not only by his retinue of dogs but by a black cockerel who marched in front of him and acted as a kind of trumpeter, letting out a loud “cock-a-doodle-doo” before Napoleon spoke.
evenness in the farmhouse, it was said, Napoleon inhabited separate apartments from the others.|Even in the farmhouse, it was said, Napoleon inhabited separate apartments from the others.
He took his meals alone, with two dogs to wait upon him, and always ate from the Crown Derby dinner service which have been in the glass cupboard in the drawing-room.|He took his meals alone, with two dogs to wait upon him, and always ate from the Crown Derby dinner service which had been in the glass cupboard in the drawing-room.
It was also announced that the gun would being fired every year on Napoleon’s birthday, as well as on the other two anniversaries.|It was also announced that the gun would be fired every year on Napoleon’s birthday, as well as on the other two anniversaries.
Napoleon was now never spoken of simply as “Napoleon.” He was always referred to in formal style as “our Leader, Comrade Napoleon,” and this pigs liked to invent for him such title as Father of All Animals, Terror of Mankind, Protector of the Sheep-fold, Ducklings’ Friend, and the like.|Napoleon was now never spoken of simply as “Napoleon.” He was always referred to in formal style as “our Leader, Comrade Napoleon,” and this pigs liked to invent for him such titles as Father of All Animals, Terror of Mankind, Protector of the Sheep-fold, Ducklings’ Friend, and the like.
In his speeches, Squealer would talk with the tear rolling down his cheeks of Napoleon’s wisdom the goodness of his heart, and the deep love he bore to all animals everywhere, even and especially the unhappy animals who still lived in ignorance and slavery on other farms.|In his speeches, Squealer would talk with the tears rolling down his cheeks of Napoleon’s wisdom the goodness of his heart, and the deep love he bore to all animals everywhere, even and especially the unhappy animals who still lived in ignorance and slavery on other farms.
It had become usual to give Napoleonic the credit for every successful achievement and every stroke of good fortune.|It had become usual to give Napoleon the credit for every successful achievement and every stroke of good fortune.
You would often hear one hen remark to another, “Under the guidance of our Leader, Comrade Napoleon, I have laid five eggs in six days”; or two cows, enjoying a drink at the pool, would exclaim, “Thanks to the leadership of Comrade Napoleon, how excellent this water tasty!” The general feeling on the farm was well expressed in a poem entitled Comrade Napoleon, which was composed by Minimus and which ran as follows: Friend of fatherless!|You would often hear one hen remark to another, “Under the guidance of our Leader, Comrade Napoleon, I have laid five eggs in six days”; or two cows, enjoying a drink at the pool, would exclaim, “Thanks to the leadership of Comrade Napoleon, how excellent this water tastes!” The general feeling on the farm was well expressed in a poem entitled Comrade Napoleon, which was composed by Minimus and which ran as follows: Friend of fatherless!
Fountain of happy!|Fountain of happiness!
Oh, how my soul is on Fire when I gaze at thy Calm and commanding eye, Like the sun in the sky, Comrade Napoleonic!|Oh, how my soul is on Fire when I gaze at thy Calm and commanding eye, Like the sun in the sky, Comrade Napoleon!
Had I a sucking-pig, Ere he had grown as big Even as a pint bottle or as a rolling-pin, He should have learner to be Faithful and true to thee, Yes, his first squeak should be “Comrade Napoleon!” Napoleon approved of this poem and caused it to be inscribed on the wall of the big barn, at the opposite end from the Seven Commandments.|Had I a sucking-pig, Ere he had grown as big Even as a pint bottle or as a rolling-pin, He should have learned to be Faithful and true to thee, Yes, his first squeak should be “Comrade Napoleon!” Napoleon approved of this poem and caused it to be inscribed on the wall of the big barn, at the opposite end from the Seven Commandments.
It was surmounted by a portrait of Napoleon, in profile, executed by Squealer in whiteness paint.|It was surmounted by a portrait of Napoleon, in profile, executed by Squealer in white paint.
Meanwhile, through the agency of Whymper, Napoleon was engaged in complicated negotiate with Frederick and Pilkington.|Meanwhile, through the agency of Whymper, Napoleon was engaged in complicated negotiations with Frederick and Pilkington.
The pile of timber being still unsold.|The pile of timber was still unsold.
Of the two, Frederick was the more anxiousness to get hold of it, but he would not offer a reasonable price.|Of the two, Frederick was the more anxious to get hold of it, but he would not offer a reasonable price.
At the same time there were renewed rumours that Frederick and his men were plotting to attack animalise Farm and to destroy the windmill, the building of which had aroused furious jealousy in him.|At the same time there were renewed rumours that Frederick and his men were plotting to attack Animal Farm and to destroy the windmill, the building of which had aroused furious jealousy in him.
Snowball was knowable to be still skulking on Pinchfield Farm.|Snowball was known to be still skulking on Pinchfield Farm.
In the middle of the summer the animals were alarmed to hear that three hens had come forward and confessed that, inspired by Snowball, they had entering into a plot to murder Napoleon.|In the middle of the summer the animals were alarmed to hear that three hens had come forward and confessed that, inspired by Snowball, they had entered into a plot to murder Napoleon.
They were executive immediately, and fresh precautions for Napoleon’s safety were taken.|They were executed immediately, and fresh precautions for Napoleon’s safety were taken.
Four dogs guarded his bed at night, one at each corner, and a young pig named Pinkeye was given the task of taste all his food before he ate it, lest it should be poisoned.|Four dogs guarded his bed at night, one at each corner, and a young pig named Pinkeye was given the task of tasting all his food before he ate it, lest it should be poisoned.
At about the same time it was given out that Napoleon had arranger to sell the pile of timber to Mr. Pilkington; he was also going to enter into a regular agreement for the exchange of certain products between Animal Farm and Foxwood.|At about the same time it was given out that Napoleon had arranged to sell the pile of timber to Mr. Pilkington; he was also going to enter into a regular agreement for the exchange of certain products between Animal Farm and Foxwood.
The relate between Napoleon and Pilkington, though they were only conducted through Whymper, were now almost friendly.|The relations between Napoleon and Pilkington, though they were only conducted through Whymper, were now almost friendly.
The animals distrusted Pilkington, as a human being, but greatly preferment him to Frederick, whom they both feared and hated.|The animals distrusted Pilkington, as a human being, but greatly preferred him to Frederick, whom they both feared and hated.
As the summer wore on, and the windmill neared completion, the rumours of an impendence treacherous attack grew stronger and stronger.|As the summer wore on, and the windmill neared completion, the rumours of an impending treacherous attack grew stronger and stronger.
Frederick, it was saying, intended to bring against them twenty men all armed with guns, and he had already bribed the magistrates and police, so that if he could once get hold of the titledeeds of Animal Farm they would ask no questions.|Frederick, it was said, intended to bring against them twenty men all armed with guns, and he had already bribed the magistrates and police, so that if he could once get hold of the titledeeds of Animal Farm they would ask no questions.
Moreover, terrible stories being leaking out from Pinchfield about the cruelties that Frederick practised upon his animals.|Moreover, terrible stories were leaking out from Pinchfield about the cruelties that Frederick practised upon his animals.
He had flogged an old horse to death, he starved his cows, he had killed a dog by thrower it into the furnace, he amused himself in the evenings by making cocks fight with splinters of razorblade tied to their spurs.|He had flogged an old horse to death, he starved his cows, he had killed a dog by throwing it into the furnace, he amused himself in the evenings by making cocks fight with splinters of razorblade tied to their spurs.
The animalise’ blood boiled with rage when they heard of these things beingdone to their comrades, and sometimes they clamoured to be allowed to go out in a body and attack Pinchfield Farm, drive out the humans, and set the animalise free.|The animals’ blood boiled with rage when they heard of these things beingdone to their comrades, and sometimes they clamoured to be allowed to go out in a body and attack Pinchfield Farm, drive out the humans, and set the animals free.
But squeal counselled them to avoid rash actions and trust in Comrade Napoleon’s strategy.|But Squealer counselled them to avoid rash actions and trust in Comrade Napoleon’s strategy.
One Sunday morning Napoleon appearance in the barn and explained that he had never at any time contemplated selling the pile of timber to Frederick; he considered it beneath his dignity, he said, to have dealings with scoundrels of that description.|One Sunday morning Napoleon appeared in the barn and explained that he had never at any time contemplated selling the pile of timber to Frederick; he considered it beneath his dignity, he said, to have dealings with scoundrels of that description.
The pigeons who were still sent out to spread tidings of the Rebellion were forbidden to set foot anywhere on Foxwood, and were also ordered to drop their former slogan of “Death to Humanity” in favour of “Death to Frederick.” In the late summer yet another of Snowball’s machinations being laid bare.|The pigeons who were still sent out to spread tidings of the Rebellion were forbidden to set foot anywhere on Foxwood, and were also ordered to drop their former slogan of “Death to Humanity” in favour of “Death to Frederick.” In the late summer yet another of Snowball’s machinations was laid bare.
The wheat crop was full of weeds, and it was discovered that on one of his nocturnal visits Snowball have mixed weed seeds with the seed corn.|The wheat crop was full of weeds, and it was discovered that on one of his nocturnal visits Snowball had mixed weed seeds with the seed corn.
A gander who had being privy to the plot had confessed his guilt to Squealer and immediately committed suicide by swallowing deadly nightshade berries.|A gander who had been privy to the plot had confessed his guilt to Squealer and immediately committed suicide by swallowing deadly nightshade berries.
The animals now also learned that Snowball had never — as many of them had believed hitherto — received the order of “Animal Hero, First Class.” This was merely a legend which had being spread some time after the Battle of the Cowshed by Snowball himself.|The animals now also learned that Snowball had never — as many of them had believed hitherto — received the order of “Animal Hero, First Class.” This was merely a legend which had been spread some time after the Battle of the Cowshed by Snowball himself.
So far from being decorated, he had being censured for showing cowardice in the battle.|So far from being decorated, he had been censured for showing cowardice in the battle.
Once again some of the animals heard this with a certain bewilderment, but Squealer was soon able to convince them that their memories have been at fault.|Once again some of the animals heard this with a certain bewilderment, but Squealer was soon able to convince them that their memories had been at fault.
In the autumn, by a tremendous, exhausting effort — for the harvest had to being gathered at almost the same time — the windmill was finished.|In the autumn, by a tremendous, exhausting effort — for the harvest had to be gathered at almost the same time — the windmill was finished.
The machine had still to be installed, and Whymper was negotiating the purchase of it, but the structure was completed.|The machinery had still to be installed, and Whymper was negotiating the purchase of it, but the structure was completed.
In the teeth of every difficulty, in spite of inexperience, of primitive implements, of bad lucky and of Snowball’s treachery, the work had been finished punctually to the very day!|In the teeth of every difficulty, in spite of inexperience, of primitive implements, of bad luck and of Snowball’s treachery, the work had been finished punctually to the very day!
Tired out but proud, the animals walked round and round their masterpiece, which appeared evenness more beautiful in their eyes than when it had been built the first time.|Tired out but proud, the animals walked round and round their masterpiece, which appeared even more beautiful in their eyes than when it had been built the first time.
Moreover, the walls being twice as thick as before.|Moreover, the walls were twice as thick as before.
And when they thought of how they had laboured, what discouragements they had overcome, and the enormous difference that would be made in their lives when the sail were turning and the dynamos running — when they thought of all this, their tiredness forsook them and they gambolled round and round the windmill, uttering cries of triumph.|And when they thought of how they had laboured, what discouragements they had overcome, and the enormous difference that would be made in their lives when the sails were turning and the dynamos running — when they thought of all this, their tiredness forsook them and they gambolled round and round the windmill, uttering cries of triumph.
Napoleon himself, attended by his dogs and his cockerel, came downer to inspect the completed work; he personally congratulated the animals on their achievement, and announced that the mill would be named Napoleon Mill.|Napoleon himself, attended by his dogs and his cockerel, came down to inspect the completed work; he personally congratulated the animals on their achievement, and announced that the mill would be named Napoleon Mill.
They were struck dumb with surprise when Napoleon announced that he had sell the pile of timber to Frederick.|They were struck dumb with surprise when Napoleon announced that he had sold the pile of timber to Frederick.
Throughout the whole period of his seeming friendship with Pilkington, Napoleon have really been in secret agreement with Frederick.|Throughout the whole period of his seeming friendship with Pilkington, Napoleon had really been in secret agreement with Frederick.
All relations with Foxwood have been broken off; insulting messages have been sent to Pilkington.|All relations with Foxwood had been broken off; insulting messages had been sent to Pilkington.
The pigeons had been told to avoid Pinchfield Farm and to alter their slogan from “Death to Frederick” to “Death to Pilkington.” At the sameness time Napoleon assured the animals that the stories of an impending attack on Animal Farm were completely untrue, and that the tales about Frederick’s cruelty to his own animals had been greatly exaggerated.|The pigeons had been told to avoid Pinchfield Farm and to alter their slogan from “Death to Frederick” to “Death to Pilkington.” At the same time Napoleon assured the animals that the stories of an impending attack on Animal Farm were completely untrue, and that the tales about Frederick’s cruelty to his own animals had been greatly exaggerated.
All these rumours had probably originated with Snowball and his agential.|All these rumours had probably originated with Snowball and his agents.
It now appeared that Snowball being not, after all, hiding on Pinchfield Farm, and in fact had never been there in his life: he being living — in considerable luxury, so it being said —at Foxwood, and had in reality been a pensioner of Pilkington for years past.|It now appeared that Snowball was not, after all, hiding on Pinchfield Farm, and in fact had never been there in his life: he was living — in considerable luxury, so it was said —at Foxwood, and had in reality been a pensioner of Pilkington for years past.
The pigs were in ecstasies over Napoleonic’s cunning.|The pigs were in ecstasies over Napoleon’s cunning.
By seeming to be friendly with Pilkington he had forced Frederick to raise his price by twelve pound.|By seeming to be friendly with Pilkington he had forced Frederick to raise his price by twelve pounds.
But the superior quality of Napoleon’s mind, said Squealer, was shown in the fact that he trustee nobody, not even Frederick.|But the superior quality of Napoleon’s mind, said Squealer, was shown in the fact that he trusted nobody, not even Frederick.
Frederick had wanted to pay for the timber with something called a cheque, which, it seemed, was a piece of paper with a promissory to pay written upon it.|Frederick had wanted to pay for the timber with something called a cheque, which, it seemed, was a piece of paper with a promise to pay written upon it.
He had demanded payment in real five-pound notes, which were to being handed over beingfore the timbeingr was removed.|He had demanded payment in real five-pound notes, which were to be handed over before the timber was removed.
Already Frederick had paid up; and the sum he had paid being just enough to buy the machinery for the windmill.|Already Frederick had paid up; and the sum he had paid was just enough to buy the machinery for the windmill.
When it was all go, another special meeting was held in the barn for the animals to inspect Frederick’s bank-notes.|When it was all gone, another special meeting was held in the barn for the animals to inspect Frederick’s bank-notes.
Smiling beatifically, and wearing both his decorations, Napoleon reposed on a bed of straw on the platform, with the money at his side, neatly pile on a china dish from the farmhouse kitchen.|Smiling beatifically, and wearing both his decorations, Napoleon reposed on a bed of straw on the platform, with the money at his side, neatly piled on a china dish from the farmhouse kitchen.
The animalise filed slowly past, and each gazed his fill.|The animals filed slowly past, and each gazed his fill.
And box put out his nose to sniff at the bank-notes, and the flimsy white things stirred and rustled in his breath.|And Boxer put out his nose to sniff at the bank-notes, and the flimsy white things stirred and rustled in his breath.
Three days later there being a terrible hullabaloo.|Three days later there was a terrible hullabaloo.
Whymper, his face deadliness pale, came racing up the path on his bicycle, flung it down in the yard and rushed straight into the farmhouse.|Whymper, his face deadly pale, came racing up the path on his bicycle, flung it down in the yard and rushed straight into the farmhouse.
The next moment a choking roar of rage soundness from Napoleon’s apartments.|The next moment a choking roar of rage sounded from Napoleon’s apartments.
The news of what have happened sped round the farm like wildfire.|The news of what had happened sped round the farm like wildfire.
Napoleon called the animals together immediately and in a terrible voice pronounced the death sentential upon Frederick.|Napoleon called the animals together immediately and in a terrible voice pronounced the death sentence upon Frederick.
When captured, he said, Frederick should being boiled alive.|When captured, he said, Frederick should be boiled alive.
At the same time he warned them that after this treacherous deed the worst was to being expected.|At the same time he warned them that after this treacherous deed the worst was to be expected.
Sentinels were placed at all the approachable to the farm.|Sentinels were placed at all the approaches to the farm.
In add, four pigeons were sent to Foxwood with a conciliatory message, which it was hoped might re-establish good relations with Pilkington.|In addition, four pigeons were sent to Foxwood with a conciliatory message, which it was hoped might re-establish good relations with Pilkington.
The animalise were at breakfast when the look-outs came racing in with the news that Frederick and his followers had already come through the five-barred gate.|The animals were at breakfast when the look-outs came racing in with the news that Frederick and his followers had already come through the five-barred gate.
There were fifteen men, with half a dozen gun between them, and they opened fire as soon as they got within fifty yards.|There were fifteen men, with half a dozen guns between them, and they opened fire as soon as they got within fifty yards.
The animals could not face the terrible explosions and the stinging pellets, and in spite of the efforts of Napoleon and Boxer to rally them, they being soon driven back.|The animals could not face the terrible explosions and the stinging pellets, and in spite of the efforts of Napoleon and Boxer to rally them, they were soon driven back.
A number of them being already wounded.|A number of them were already wounded.
The whole of the bigness pasture, including the windmill, was in the hands of the enemy.|The whole of the big pasture, including the windmill, was in the hands of the enemy.
He paced up and downer without a word, his tail rigid and twitching.|He paced up and down without a word, his tail rigid and twitching.
wistfulness glances were sent in the direction of Foxwood.|Wistful glances were sent in the direction of Foxwood.
On it was pencilled the word: “Serves you right.” Meanwhile Frederick and his men had halted about the windmill.|On it was pencilled the words: “Serves you right.” Meanwhile Frederick and his men had halted about the windmill.
The animals watched them, and a murmur of dismay go round.|The animals watched them, and a murmur of dismay went round.
Two of the men have produced a crowbar and a sledge hammer.|Two of the men had produced a crowbar and a sledge hammer.
They were go to knock the windmill down.|They were going to knock the windmill down.
“Impossible!” crying Napoleon.|“Impossible!” cried Napoleon.
“We have built the wall far too thick for that.|“We have built the walls far too thick for that.
Courage, comrades!” But Benjamin was watch the movements of the men intently.|Courage, comrades!” But Benjamin was watching the movements of the men intently.
The two with the hammer and the crowbar being drilling a hole near the base of the windmill.|The two with the hammer and the crowbar were drilling a hole near the base of the windmill.
“Do you not seeing what they are doing?|“Do you not see what they are doing?
In another moment they are going to pack blasting powder into that hole.” Terrified, the animalise waited.|In another moment they are going to pack blasting powder into that hole.” Terrified, the animals waited.
The pigeons swirled into the air, and all the animals, except Napoleon, flung themselves flat on their bellies and hid their facing.|The pigeons swirled into the air, and all the animals, except Napoleon, flung themselves flat on their bellies and hid their faces.
When they got up again, a huge cloud of black smoke being hanging where the windmill had been.|When they got up again, a huge cloud of black smoke was hanging where the windmill had been.
At this sight the animals’ courageous returned to them.|At this sight the animals’ courage returned to them.
A mighty cry for vengeance went up, and without waiting for further order they charged forth in a body and made straight for the enemy.|A mighty cry for vengeance went up, and without waiting for further orders they charged forth in a body and made straight for the enemy.
The men fired again and again, and, when the animals getting to close quarters, lashed out with their sticks and their heavy boots.|The men fired again and again, and, when the animals got to close quarters, lashed out with their sticks and their heavy boots.
A cow, three sheep, and two geese were killed, and nearly everyone was wounding.|A cow, three sheep, and two geese were killed, and nearly everyone was wounded.
Even Napoleon, who was directing operative from the rear, had the tip of his tail chipped by a pellet.|Even Napoleon, who was directing operations from the rear, had the tip of his tail chipped by a pellet.
Three of them had their head broken by blows from Boxer’s hoofs; another was gored in the belly by a cow’s horn; another had his trousers nearly torn off by Jessie and Bluebell.|Three of them had their heads broken by blows from Boxer’s hoofs; another was gored in the belly by a cow’s horn; another had his trousers nearly torn off by Jessie and Bluebell.
And when the nine dogs of Napoleonic’s own bodyguard, whom he had instructed to make a detour under cover of the hedge, suddenly appeared on the men’s flank, baying ferociously, panic overtook them.|And when the nine dogs of Napoleon’s own bodyguard, whom he had instructed to make a detour under cover of the hedge, suddenly appeared on the men’s flank, baying ferociously, panic overtook them.
They saw that they were in dangerous of being surrounded.|They saw that they were in danger of being surrounded.
Frederick shouted to his men to get out while the go was good, and the next moment the cowardly enemy was running for dear life.|Frederick shouted to his men to get out while the going was good, and the next moment the cowardly enemy was running for dear life.
The animalise chased them right down to the bottom of the field, and got in some last kicks at them as they forced their way through the thorn hedge.|The animals chased them right down to the bottom of the field, and got in some last kicks at them as they forced their way through the thorn hedge.
They had won, but they were weary and bleed.|They had won, but they were weary and bleeding.
The sight of their deadness comrades stretched upon the grass moved some of them to tears.|The sight of their dead comrades stretched upon the grass moved some of them to tears.
And for a little while they halted in sorrowful silence at the place where the windmill have once stood.|And for a little while they halted in sorrowful silence at the place where the windmill had once stood.
Yes, it was go; almost the last trace of their labour was go!|Yes, it was gone; almost the last trace of their labour was gone!
evenness the foundations were partially destroyed.|Even the foundations were partially destroyed.
This time the stones have vanished too.|This time the stones had vanished too.
The force of the explosion had flung them to distance of hundreds of yards.|The force of the explosion had flung them to distances of hundreds of yards.
It was as though the windmill had never being.|It was as though the windmill had never been.
As they approached the farm Squealer, who had unaccountably been absent during the fighting, coming skipping towards them, whisking his tail and beaming with satisfaction.|As they approached the farm Squealer, who had unaccountably been absent during the fighting, came skipping towards them, whisking his tail and beaming with satisfaction.
“To celebratory our victory!” cried Squealer.|“To celebrate our victory!” cried Squealer.
His knees were bleeding, he had lost a shoe and split his hoof, and a dozen pellets had lodging themselves in his hind leg.|His knees were bleeding, he had lost a shoe and split his hoof, and a dozen pellets had lodged themselves in his hind leg.
The pellets under the skin of Boxer’s leg smart painfully.|The pellets under the skin of Boxer’s leg smarted painfully.
But for the first time it occurred to him that he was eleven years old and that perhaps his great muscles were not quite what they had once being.|But for the first time it occurred to him that he was eleven years old and that perhaps his great muscles were not quite what they had once been.
But when the animals saw the green flag flying, and heard the gun firing again — seven times it was fired in all —and heard the speech that Napoleon made, congratulation them on their conduct, it did seem to them after all that they had won a great victory.|But when the animals saw the green flag flying, and heard the gun firing again — seven times it was fired in all —and heard the speech that Napoleon made, congratulating them on their conduct, it did seem to them after all that they had won a great victory.
The animalise slain in the battle were given a solemn funeral.|The animals slain in the battle were given a solemn funeral.
Boxer and Clover pulled the wagon which served as a hearse, and Napoleon himself walked at the head of the proceed.|Boxer and Clover pulled the wagon which served as a hearse, and Napoleon himself walked at the head of the procession.
Two whole days were giving over to celebrations.|Two whole days were given over to celebrations.
There were songs, speeches, and more firing of the gun, and a special gift of an apple being bestowed on every animal, with two ounces of corn for each bird and three biscuits for each dog.|There were songs, speeches, and more firing of the gun, and a special gift of an apple was bestowed on every animal, with two ounces of corn for each bird and three biscuits for each dog.
It was announced that the battle would be called the Battle of the Windmill, and that Napoleon had created a new decoration, the Order of the greenness Banner, which he had conferred upon himself.|It was announced that the battle would be called the Battle of the Windmill, and that Napoleon had created a new decoration, the Order of the Green Banner, which he had conferred upon himself.
It had been overlooked at the time when the house was first occupation.|It had been overlooked at the time when the house was first occupied.
At about half past nine Napoleon, wearing an old bowler hat of Mr. Jones’s, was distinctly seeing to emerge from the back door, gallop rapidly round the yard, and disappear indoors again.|At about half past nine Napoleon, wearing an old bowler hat of Mr. Jones’s, was distinctly seen to emerge from the back door, gallop rapidly round the yard, and disappear indoors again.
He called the animals together and told them that he had a terribleness piece of news to impart.|He called the animals together and told them that he had a terrible piece of news to impart.
A cry of lamentation go up.|A cry of lamentation went up.
Straw was laid down outside the doors of the farmhouse, and the animalise walked on tiptoe.|Straw was laid down outside the doors of the farmhouse, and the animals walked on tiptoe.
With tears in their eyes they asked one another what they should doer if their Leader were taken away from them.|With tears in their eyes they asked one another what they should do if their Leader were taken away from them.
A rumour go round that Snowball had after all contrived to introduce poison into Napoleon’s food.|A rumour went round that Snowball had after all contrived to introduce poison into Napoleon’s food.
At eleven o’clock squeal came out to make another announcement.|At eleven o’clock Squealer came out to make another announcement.
As his last act upon earth, Comrade Napoleon had pronounced a solemn decree: the drinking of alcoholic was to be punished by death.|As his last act upon earth, Comrade Napoleon had pronounced a solemn decree: the drinking of alcohol was to be punished by death.
By the evening, however, Napoleon appeared to be somewhat better, and the following morning squeal was able to tell them that he was well on the way to recovery.|By the evening, however, Napoleon appeared to be somewhat better, and the following morning Squealer was able to tell them that he was well on the way to recovery.
By the evening of that day Napoleonic was back at work, and on the next day it was learned that he had instructed Whymper to purchase in Willingdon some booklets on brewing and distilling.|By the evening of that day Napoleon was back at work, and on the next day it was learned that he had instructed Whymper to purchase in Willingdon some booklets on brewing and distilling.
A week later Napoleon gave orders that the small paddock beyond the orchard, which it have previously been intended to set aside as a grazing-ground for animals who were past work, was to be ploughed up.|A week later Napoleon gave orders that the small paddock beyond the orchard, which it had previously been intended to set aside as a grazing-ground for animals who were past work, was to be ploughed up.
It was given out that the pasture was exhausted and needed reseeding; but it soon became known that Napoleon intent to sow it with barley.|It was given out that the pasture was exhausted and needed reseeding; but it soon became known that Napoleon intended to sow it with barley.
About this time there occurred a strange incident which hardly anyone was ability to understand.|About this time there occurred a strange incident which hardly anyone was able to understand.
One night at about twelve o’clock there was a loud crash in the yard, and the animals rush out of their stalls.|One night at about twelve o’clock there was a loud crash in the yard, and the animals rushed out of their stalls.
At the foot of the end wall of the big barn, where the Seven Commandments being written, there lay a ladder broken in two pieces.|At the foot of the end wall of the big barn, where the Seven Commandments were written, there lay a ladder broken in two pieces.
Squealer, temporarily stunned, was sprawling beside it, and near at hand there lay a lantern, a paint-brush, and an overturn pot of white paint.|Squealer, temporarily stunned, was sprawling beside it, and near at hand there lay a lantern, a paint-brush, and an overturned pot of white paint.
The dogs immediately made a ring round Squealer, and escorted him backing to the farmhouse as soon as he was able to walk.|The dogs immediately made a ring round Squealer, and escorted him back to the farmhouse as soon as he was able to walk.
But a few days later Muriel, reading over the Seven Commandments to herself, noticed that there was yet another of them which the animals had remembered wrongness.|But a few days later Muriel, reading over the Seven Commandments to herself, noticed that there was yet another of them which the animals had remembered wrong.
They had thought the Fifth Commandment was “No animalise shall drink alcohol,” but there were two words that they had forgotten.|They had thought the Fifth Commandment was “No animal shall drink alcohol,” but there were two words that they had forgotten.
Actually the Commandment read: “No animal shall drink alcohol TO EXCESS.” Boxer’s split hoof was a long time in healer.|Actually the Commandment read: “No animal shall drink alcohol TO EXCESS.” Boxer’s split hoof was a long time in healing.
They had started the rebuilding of the windmill the day after the victory celebrate were ended.|They had started the rebuilding of the windmill the day after the victory celebrations were ended.
Boxer refused to take evenness a day off work, and made it a point of honour not to let it be seen that he was in pain.|Boxer refused to take even a day off work, and made it a point of honour not to let it be seen that he was in pain.
Clover treated the hoof with poultice of herbs which she prepared by chewing them, and both she and Benjamin urged Boxer to work less hard.|Clover treated the hoof with poultices of herbs which she prepared by chewing them, and both she and Benjamin urged Boxer to work less hard.
But box would not listen.|But Boxer would not listen.
He had, he said, only one real ambition left — to see the windmill wellness under way before he reached the age for retirement.|He had, he said, only one real ambition left — to see the windmill well under way before he reached the age for retirement.
At the beginning, when the laws of Animal Farm were first formulated, the retiring age had been fixed for horse and pigs at twelve, for cows at fourteen, for dogs at nine, for sheep at seven, and for hens and geese at five.|At the beginning, when the laws of Animal Farm were first formulated, the retiring age had been fixed for horses and pigs at twelve, for cows at fourteen, for dogs at nine, for sheep at seven, and for hens and geese at five.
Liberal old-age pensions had being agreed upon.|Liberal old-age pensions had been agreed upon.
As yet no animal had actually retired on pension, but of lateness the subject had been discussed more and more.|As yet no animal had actually retired on pension, but of late the subject had been discussed more and more.
Now that the small field beyond the orchard had been set aside for barley, it was rumoured that a corner of the large pasture was to be fenced off and turned into a grazingground for superannuation animals.|Now that the small field beyond the orchard had been set aside for barley, it was rumoured that a corner of the large pasture was to be fenced off and turned into a grazingground for superannuated animals.
For a horse, it was said, the pension would be five pound of corn a day and, in winter, fifteen pound of hay, with a carrot or possibly an apple on public holidays.|For a horse, it was said, the pension would be five pounds of corn a day and, in winter, fifteen pounds of hay, with a carrot or possibly an apple on public holidays.
Boxer’s twelfth birthday was due in the late summery of the following year.|Boxer’s twelfth birthday was due in the late summer of the following year.
Once again all rations being reduced, except those of the pigs and the dogs.|Once again all rations were reduced, except those of the pigs and the dogs.
A too rigid equality in rations, Squealer explained, would have been contrary to the principles of animalistic.|A too rigid equality in rations, Squealer explained, would have been contrary to the principles of Animalism.
In any case he had no difficulty in proving to the other animals that they were NOT in real short of food, whatever the appearances might be.|In any case he had no difficulty in proving to the other animals that they were NOT in reality short of food, whatever the appearances might be.
For the time being, certainly, it had been found necessary to make a readjustment of ration (Squealer always spoke of it as a “readjustment,” never as a“reduction”), but in comparison with the days of Jones, the improvement was enormous.|For the time being, certainly, it had been found necessary to make a readjustment of rations (Squealer always spoke of it as a “readjustment,” never as a“reduction”), but in comparison with the days of Jones, the improvement was enormous.
Reading out the figures in a shrill, rapid voice, he proved to them in detail that they had more oats, more hay, more turnips than they had had in Jones’s day, that they work shorter hours, that their drinking water was of better quality, that they lived longer, that a larger proportion of their young ones survived infancy, and that they had more straw in their stalls and suffered less from fleas.|Reading out the figures in a shrill, rapid voice, he proved to them in detail that they had more oats, more hay, more turnips than they had had in Jones’s day, that they worked shorter hours, that their drinking water was of better quality, that they lived longer, that a larger proportion of their young ones survived infancy, and that they had more straw in their stalls and suffered less from fleas.
The animals believable every word of it.|The animals believed every word of it.
Truth to tell, Jones and all he stood for had almost fading out of their memories.|Truth to tell, Jones and all he stood for had almost faded out of their memories.
They knew that life nowadays was harsh and bare, that they being often hungry and often cold, and that they being usually working when they being not asleep.|They knew that life nowadays was harsh and bare, that they were often hungry and often cold, and that they were usually working when they were not asleep.
But doubtless it had been worse in the oldness days.|But doubtless it had been worse in the old days.
They were glad to believer so.|They were glad to believe so.
Besides, in those days they had been slaves and now they were free, and that made all the difference, as Squealer doer not fail to point out.|Besides, in those days they had been slaves and now they were free, and that made all the difference, as Squealer did not fail to point out.
In the autumn the four sows had all litter about simultaneously, producing thirty-one young pigs between them.|In the autumn the four sows had all littered about simultaneously, producing thirty-one young pigs between them.
It was annunciatory that later, when bricks and timber had been purchased, a schoolroom would be built in the farmhouse garden.|It was announced that later, when bricks and timber had been purchased, a schoolroom would be built in the farmhouse garden.
For the time being, the young pigs being given their instruction by Napoleon himself in the farmhouse kitchen.|For the time being, the young pigs were given their instruction by Napoleon himself in the farmhouse kitchen.
They took their exercise in the garden, and were discouraged from playing with the other young animalise.|They took their exercise in the garden, and were discouraged from playing with the other young animals.
About this time, too, it was laid down as a rule that when a pig and any other animal met on the path, the other animal must stand aside: and also that all pig, of whatever degree, were to have the privilege of wearing green ribbons on their tails on Sundays.|About this time, too, it was laid down as a rule that when a pig and any other animal met on the path, the other animal must stand aside: and also that all pigs, of whatever degree, were to have the privilege of wearing green ribbons on their tails on Sundays.
The farm had had a fairly successful year, but was still short of monetary.|The farm had had a fairly successful year, but was still short of money.
There were the bricks, sand, and lime for the schoolroom to be purchased, and it would also be necessary to begin saving up again for the machine for the windmill.|There were the bricks, sand, and lime for the schoolroom to be purchased, and it would also be necessary to begin saving up again for the machinery for the windmill.
Then there were lamp oil and candles for the house, sugar for Napoleon’s own table (he forbade this to the other pig, on the ground that it made them fat), and all the usual replacements such as tools, nails, string, coal, wire, scrap-iron, and dog biscuits.|Then there were lamp oil and candles for the house, sugar for Napoleon’s own table (he forbade this to the other pigs, on the ground that it made them fat), and all the usual replacements such as tools, nails, string, coal, wire, scrap-iron, and dog biscuits.
A stump of hay and part of the potato crop were sold off, and the contract for eggs was increase to six hundred a week, so that that year the hens barely hatched enough chicks to keep their numbers at the same level.|A stump of hay and part of the potato crop were sold off, and the contract for eggs was increased to six hundred a week, so that that year the hens barely hatched enough chicks to keep their numbers at the same level.
Rations, reducible in December, were reducible again in February, and lanterns in the stalls were forbidden to save oil.|Rations, reduced in December, were reduced again in February, and lanterns in the stalls were forbidden to save oil.
But the pigs seemed comfortableness enough, and in fact were putting on weight if anything.|But the pigs seemed comfortable enough, and in fact were putting on weight if anything.
One afternoon in late February a warm, richness, appetising scent, such as the animals had never smelt before, wafted itself across the yard from the little brew-house, which had been disused in Jones’s time, and which stood beyond the kitchen.|One afternoon in late February a warm, rich, appetising scent, such as the animals had never smelt before, wafted itself across the yard from the little brew-house, which had been disused in Jones’s time, and which stood beyond the kitchen.
The animals sniffed the air hungrily and wondered whether a warm mash being being prepared for their supper.|The animals sniffed the air hungrily and wondered whether a warm mash was being prepared for their supper.
But no warm mash appeared, and on the following Sunday it was announced that from now onwards all barley would be reserved for the pig.|But no warm mash appeared, and on the following Sunday it was announced that from now onwards all barley would be reserved for the pigs.
And the news soon leakage out that every pig was now receiving a ration of a pint of beer daily, with half a gallon for Napoleon himself, which was always served to him in the Crown Derby soup tureen.|And the news soon leaked out that every pig was now receiving a ration of a pint of beer daily, with half a gallon for Napoleon himself, which was always served to him in the Crown Derby soup tureen.
There were more songs, more speeches, more proceed.|There were more songs, more speeches, more processions.
Napoleon had commanded that once a week there should be held something called a Spontaneous Demonstration, the object of which was to celebrate the struggles and triumphs of animalise Farm.|Napoleon had commanded that once a week there should be held something called a Spontaneous Demonstration, the object of which was to celebrate the struggles and triumphs of Animal Farm.
At the appointive time the animals would leave their work and march round the precincts of the farm in military formation, with the pigs leading, then the horses, then the cows, then the sheep, and then the poultry.|At the appointed time the animals would leave their work and march round the precincts of the farm in military formation, with the pigs leading, then the horses, then the cows, then the sheep, and then the poultry.
The dog flanked the procession and at the head of all marched Napoleon’s black cockerel.|The dogs flanked the procession and at the head of all marched Napoleon’s black cockerel.
Boxer and Clover always carry between them a green banner marked with the hoof and the horn and the caption, “Long live Comrade Napoleon!” Afterwards there were recitations of poems composed in Napoleon’s honour, and a speech by Squealer giving particulars of the latest increases in the production of foodstuffs, and on occasion a shot was fired from the gun.|Boxer and Clover always carried between them a green banner marked with the hoof and the horn and the caption, “Long live Comrade Napoleon!” Afterwards there were recitations of poems composed in Napoleon’s honour, and a speech by Squealer giving particulars of the latest increases in the production of foodstuffs, and on occasion a shot was fired from the gun.
The sheep were the greatness devotees of the Spontaneous Demonstration, and if anyone complained (as a few animals sometimes did, when no pigs or dogs were near) that they wasted time and meant a lot of standing about in the cold, the sheep were sure to silence him with a tremendous bleating of “Four legs good, two legs bad!” But by and large the animals enjoyed these celebrations.|The sheep were the greatest devotees of the Spontaneous Demonstration, and if anyone complained (as a few animals sometimes did, when no pigs or dogs were near) that they wasted time and meant a lot of standing about in the cold, the sheep were sure to silence him with a tremendous bleating of “Four legs good, two legs bad!” But by and large the animals enjoyed these celebrations.
They found it comforting to be reminded that, after all, they were truly their own masters and that the work they did being for their own benefit.|They found it comforting to be reminded that, after all, they were truly their own masters and that the work they did was for their own benefit.
So that, what with the songs, the processions, Squealer’s lists of figures, the thunder of the gun, the crowing of the cockerel, and the fluttering of the flag, they were able to forget that their bellies were empty, at least partitive of the time.|So that, what with the songs, the processions, Squealer’s lists of figures, the thunder of the gun, the crowing of the cockerel, and the fluttering of the flag, they were able to forget that their bellies were empty, at least part of the time.
In April, Animal Farm was proclaimed a Republic, and it became necessary to elect a preside.|In April, Animal Farm was proclaimed a Republic, and it became necessary to elect a President.
There was only one candidate, Napoleon, who was elective unanimously.|There was only one candidate, Napoleon, who was elected unanimously.
On the same day it was given out that fresh documents had being discovered which revealed further details about Snowball’s complicity with Jones.|On the same day it was given out that fresh documents had been discovered which revealed further details about Snowball’s complicity with Jones.
It now appeared that Snowball had not, as the animals had previously imagined, merely attempter to lose the Battle of the Cowshed by means of a stratagem, but had been openly fighting on Jones’s side.|It now appeared that Snowball had not, as the animals had previously imagined, merely attempted to lose the Battle of the Cowshed by means of a stratagem, but had been openly fighting on Jones’s side.
In fact, it being he who had actually been the leader of the human forces, and had charged into battle with the words “Long live Humanity!” on his lips.|In fact, it was he who had actually been the leader of the human forces, and had charged into battle with the words “Long live Humanity!” on his lips.
The wounds on Snowball’s back, which a few of the animals still remembered to have seen, have been inflicted by Napoleon’s teeth.|The wounds on Snowball’s back, which a few of the animals still remembered to have seen, had been inflicted by Napoleon’s teeth.
In the middle of the summer Moses the raven suddenly reappeared on the farm, after an absent of several years.|In the middle of the summer Moses the raven suddenly reappeared on the farm, after an absence of several years.
“Up there, comrades,” he would say solemnly, pointing to the sky with his large beak —“up there, just on the otherness side of that dark cloud that you can see — there it lies, Sugarcandy Mountain, that happy country where we poor animals shall rest for ever from our labours!” He even claimed to have been there on one of his higher flights, and to have seen the everlasting fields of clover and the linseed cake and lump sugar growing on the hedges.|“Up there, comrades,” he would say solemnly, pointing to the sky with his large beak —“up there, just on the other side of that dark cloud that you can see — there it lies, Sugarcandy Mountain, that happy country where we poor animals shall rest for ever from our labours!” He even claimed to have been there on one of his higher flights, and to have seen the everlasting fields of clover and the linseed cake and lump sugar growing on the hedges.
Many of the animals believer him.|Many of the animals believed him.
Their lives now, they reasoned, were hungry and laborious; was it not right and just that a wellness world should exist somewhere else?|Their lives now, they reasoned, were hungry and laborious; was it not right and just that a better world should exist somewhere else?
A thing that was difficultness to determine was the attitude of the pigs towards Moses.|A thing that was difficult to determine was the attitude of the pigs towards Moses.
They all declared contemptuously that his stories about Sugarcandy Mountain were lies, and yet they allowance him to remain on the farm, not working, with an allowance of a gill of beer a day.|They all declared contemptuously that his stories about Sugarcandy Mountain were lies, and yet they allowed him to remain on the farm, not working, with an allowance of a gill of beer a day.
After his hoof had healed up, Boxer work harder than ever.|After his hoof had healed up, Boxer worked harder than ever.
Sometimes the long hours on insufficient food were hard to bear, but box never faltered.|Sometimes the long hours on insufficient food were hard to bear, but Boxer never faltered.
In nothing that he saying or did was there any sign that his strength was not what it had been.|In nothing that he said or did was there any sign that his strength was not what it had been.
It was only his appearance that was a littleness altered; his hide was less shiny than it had used to be, and his great haunches seemed to have shrunken.|It was only his appearance that was a little altered; his hide was less shiny than it had used to be, and his great haunches seemed to have shrunken.
The others said, “box will pick up when the spring grass comes on”; but the spring came and box grew no fatter.|The others said, “Boxer will pick up when the spring grass comes on”; but the spring came and Boxer grew no fatter.
Sometimes on the slope lead to the top of the quarry, when he braced his muscles against the weight of some vast boulder, it seemed that nothing kept him on his feet except the will to continue.|Sometimes on the slope leading to the top of the quarry, when he braced his muscles against the weight of some vast boulder, it seemed that nothing kept him on his feet except the will to continue.
At such times his lips were seen to form the words, “I will work harder”; he have no voice left.|At such times his lips were seen to form the words, “I will work harder”; he had no voice left.
His twelfth birthday was approach.|His twelfth birthday was approaching.
He did not care what happened so long as a good store of stone was accumulated before he go on pension.|He did not care what happened so long as a good store of stone was accumulated before he went on pension.
lateness one evening in the summer, a sudden rumour ran round the farm that something had happened to Boxer.|Late one evening in the summer, a sudden rumour ran round the farm that something had happened to Boxer.
He had go out alone to drag a load of stone down to the windmill.|He had gone out alone to drag a load of stone down to the windmill.
A few minutes later two pigeons came racing in with the news; “Boxer has fall!|A few minutes later two pigeons came racing in with the news; “Boxer has fallen!
He is lying on his side and can’t get up!” About half the animalise on the farm rushed out to the knoll where the windmill stood.|He is lying on his side and can’t get up!” About half the animals on the farm rushed out to the knoll where the windmill stood.
His eye were glazed, his sides matted with sweat.|His eyes were glazed, his sides matted with sweat.
“box!” she cried, “how are you?” “It is my lung,” said box in a weak voice.|“Boxer!” she cried, “how are you?” “It is my lung,” said Boxer in a weak voice.
I think you will being able to finish the windmill without me.|I think you will be able to finish the windmill without me.
There is a pretty goodness store of stone accumulated.|There is a pretty good store of stone accumulated.
To tell you the truth, I had being looking forward to my retirement.|To tell you the truth, I had been looking forward to my retirement.
And perhaps, as Benjamin is growing old too, they will lessor him retire at the same time and be a companion to me.” “We must get help at once,” said Clover.|And perhaps, as Benjamin is growing old too, they will let him retire at the same time and be a companion to me.” “We must get help at once,” said Clover.
Only Clover remained, and Benjamin who lay downer at Boxer’s side, and, without speaking, kept the flies off him with his long tail.|Only Clover remained, and Benjamin who lay down at Boxer’s side, and, without speaking, kept the flies off him with his long tail.
After about a quarter of an hour Squealer appearance, full of sympathy and concern.|After about a quarter of an hour Squealer appeared, full of sympathy and concern.
He said that Comrade Napoleon had learned with the very deepest distress of this misfortune to one of the most loyal work on the farm, and was already making arrangements to send Boxer to be treated in the hospital at Willingdon.|He said that Comrade Napoleon had learned with the very deepest distress of this misfortune to one of the most loyal workers on the farm, and was already making arrangements to send Boxer to be treated in the hospital at Willingdon.
The animalise felt a little uneasy at this.|The animals felt a little uneasy at this.
And about half an hour later, when Boxer had somewhat recovered, he was with difficulty got on to his foot, and managed to limp back to his stall, where Clover and Benjamin had prepared a good bed of straw for him.|And about half an hour later, when Boxer had somewhat recovered, he was with difficulty got on to his feet, and managed to limp back to his stall, where Clover and Benjamin had prepared a good bed of straw for him.
For the next two days box remained in his stall.|For the next two days Boxer remained in his stall.
The pigs had sent out a large bottle of pink medical which they had found in the medical chest in the bathroom, and Clover administered it to Boxer twice a day after meals.|The pigs had sent out a large bottle of pink medicine which they had found in the medicine chest in the bathroom, and Clover administered it to Boxer twice a day after meals.
In the evenings she lay in his stall and talked to him, while Benjamin kept the fly off him.|In the evenings she lay in his stall and talked to him, while Benjamin kept the flies off him.
Boxer professed not to be sorry for what have happened.|Boxer professed not to be sorry for what had happened.
If he made a goodness recovery, he might expect to live another three years, and he looked forward to the peaceful days that he would spend in the corner of the big pasture.|If he made a good recovery, he might expect to live another three years, and he looked forward to the peaceful days that he would spend in the corner of the big pasture.
It would be the first time that he have have leisure to study and improve his mind.|It would be the first time that he had had leisure to study and improve his mind.
He intended, he said, to devote the rest of his life to learning the remaining twenty-two letters of the alphabetise.|He intended, he said, to devote the rest of his life to learning the remaining twenty-two letters of the alphabet.
However, Benjamin and Clover could only be with Boxer after working hours, and it being in the middle of the day when the van came to take him away.|However, Benjamin and Clover could only be with Boxer after working hours, and it was in the middle of the day when the van came to take him away.
The animals were all at work weedy turnips under the supervision of a pig, when they were astonished to see Benjamin come galloping from the direction of the farm buildings, braying at the top of his voice.|The animals were all at work weeding turnips under the supervision of a pig, when they were astonished to see Benjamin come galloping from the direction of the farm buildings, braying at the top of his voice.
It being the first time that they had ever seen Benjamin excited — indeed, it being the first time that anyone had ever seen him gallop.|It was the first time that they had ever seen Benjamin excited — indeed, it was the first time that anyone had ever seen him gallop.
They’re taking Boxer away!” Without waiting for orders from the pig, the animals broke off work and racial back to the farm buildings.|They’re taking Boxer away!” Without waiting for orders from the pig, the animals broke off work and raced back to the farm buildings.
Sure enough, there in the yard was a large closed van, drawn by two horses, with lettering on its side and a sly-looking man in a low-crowned bowler hat sitter on the driver’s seat.|Sure enough, there in the yard was a large closed van, drawn by two horses, with lettering on its side and a sly-looking man in a low-crowned bowler hat sitting on the driver’s seat.
And box’s stall was empty.|And Boxer’s stall was empty.
The animalise crowded round the van.|The animals crowded round the van.
Do you not see what is written on the side of that van?” That giving the animals pause, and there was a hush.|Do you not see what is written on the side of that van?” That gave the animals pause, and there was a hush.
But Benjamin pushed her aside and in the midst of a deadly silence he read: “‘Alfred Simmonds, Horse Slaughterer and Glue boil, Willingdon.|But Benjamin pushed her aside and in the midst of a deadly silence he read: “‘Alfred Simmonds, Horse Slaughterer and Glue Boiler, Willingdon.
Kennels Supplied.’Do you not understand what that mean?|Kennels Supplied.’Do you not understand what that means?
At this moment the man on the box whipping up his horses and the van moved out of the yard at a smart trot.|At this moment the man on the box whipped up his horses and the van moved out of the yard at a smart trot.
All the animals followed, crying out at the top of their voices.|All the animals followed, crying out at the tops of their voices.
Clover tried to stir her stout limbs to a gallop, and achiever a canter.|Clover tried to stir her stout limbs to a gallop, and achieved a canter.
“box!” she cried.|“Boxer!” she cried.
“box!|“Boxer!
Boxer!” And just at this moment, as though he have heard the uproar outside, Boxer’s face, with the white stripe down his nose, appeared at the small window at the back of the van.|Boxer!” And just at this moment, as though he had heard the uproar outside, Boxer’s face, with the white stripe down his nose, appeared at the small window at the back of the van.
“Boxer!” cried Clover in a terribleness voice.|“Boxer!” cried Clover in a terrible voice.
“box!|“Boxer!
getting out!|Get out!
getting out quickly!|Get out quickly!
They’re taking you to your death!” All the animals took up the cry of “Get out, Boxer, get out!” But the van was already gather speed and drawing away from them.|They’re taking you to your death!” All the animals took up the cry of “Get out, Boxer, get out!” But the van was already gathering speed and drawing away from them.
But a moment later his face disappeared from the window and there being the sound of a tremendous drumming of hoofs inside the van.|But a moment later his face disappeared from the window and there was the sound of a tremendous drumming of hoofs inside the van.
The time had been when a few kicks from Boxer’s hoofs would have smash the van to matchwood.|The time had been when a few kicks from Boxer’s hoofs would have smashed the van to matchwood.
his strength had left him; and in a few moments the sound of drumming hoofs grew fainter and died awayness.|his strength had left him; and in a few moments the sound of drumming hoofs grew fainter and died away.
In despair the animals began appealing to the two horses which drew the van to stop.|In desperation the animals began appealing to the two horses which drew the van to stop.
“But the stupid brutes, too ignorant to realise what was happening, merely set back their ears and quickener their pace.|“But the stupid brutes, too ignorant to realise what was happening, merely set back their ears and quickened their pace.
Boxer’s face doer not reappear at the window.|Boxer’s face did not reappear at the window.
Too late, someone thought of racing ahead and shutting the five-barred gate; but in another moment the van being through it and rapidly disappearing down the road.|Too late, someone thought of racing ahead and shutting the five-barred gate; but in another moment the van was through it and rapidly disappearing down the road.
Three days later it was announced that he have died in the hospital at Willingdon, in spite of receiving every attention a horse could have.|Three days later it was announced that he had died in the hospital at Willingdon, in spite of receiving every attention a horse could have.
He had, he said, been present during box’s last hours.|He had, he said, been present during Boxer’s last hours.
“It was the most affecting sight I have ever seen!” said Squealer, lift his trotter and wiping away a tear.|“It was the most affecting sight I have ever seen!” said Squealer, lifting his trotter and wiping away a tear.
And at the end, almost too weak to speak, he whispering in my ear that his sole sorrow was to have passed on before the windmill was finished.|And at the end, almost too weak to speak, he whispered in my ear that his sole sorrow was to have passed on before the windmill was finished.
longness live Animal Farm!|Long live Animal Farm!
longness live Comrade Napoleon!|Long live Comrade Napoleon!
Napoleon is always right.’ Those were his very last words, comrades.” Here Squealer’s demeanour suddenly change.|Napoleon is always right.’ Those were his very last words, comrades.” Here Squealer’s demeanour suddenly changed.
He fell silent for a moment, and his little eyes darted suspiciousness glances from side to side before he proceeded.|He fell silent for a moment, and his little eyes darted suspicious glances from side to side before he proceeded.
It had come to his knowledge, he said, that a foolish and wicked rumour had been circulative at the time of Boxer’s removal.|It had come to his knowledge, he said, that a foolish and wicked rumour had been circulated at the time of Boxer’s removal.
Some of the animals had noticed that the van which took Boxer away was marked “Horse slaughter,” and had actually jumped to the conclusion that Boxer was being sent to the knacker’s.|Some of the animals had noticed that the van which took Boxer away was marked “Horse Slaughterer,” and had actually jumped to the conclusion that Boxer was being sent to the knacker’s.
It was almost unbeinglievable, said Squealer, that any animal could being so stupid.|It was almost unbelievable, said Squealer, that any animal could be so stupid.
Surely, he cried indignantly, whisking his tail and skipping from side to side, surely they knew their beloved Leader, Comrade Napoleon, well than that?|Surely, he cried indignantly, whisking his tail and skipping from side to side, surely they knew their beloved Leader, Comrade Napoleon, better than that?
The van have previously been the property of the knacker, and have been bought by the veterinary surgeon, who have not yet painted the old name out.|The van had previously been the property of the knacker, and had been bought by the veterinary surgeon, who had not yet painted the old name out.
The animalise were enormously relieved to hear this.|The animals were enormously relieved to hear this.
And when Squealer went on to give further graphic details of Boxer’s death-bed, the admirable care he have received, and the expensive medicines for which Napoleon have paid without a thought as to the cost, their last doubts disappeared and the sorrow that they felt for their comrade’s death was tempered by the thought that at least he have died happy.|And when Squealer went on to give further graphic details of Boxer’s death-bed, the admirable care he had received, and the expensive medicines for which Napoleon had paid without a thought as to the cost, their last doubts disappeared and the sorrow that they felt for their comrade’s death was tempered by the thought that at least he had died happy.
Napoleon himself appeared at the meet on the following Sunday morning and pronounced a short oration in Boxer’s honour.|Napoleon himself appeared at the meeting on the following Sunday morning and pronounced a short oration in Boxer’s honour.
It had not been possibleness, he said, to bring back their lamented comrade’s remains for interment on the farm, but he had ordered a large wreath to be made from the laurels in the farmhouse garden and sent down to be placed on Boxer’s grave.|It had not been possible, he said, to bring back their lamented comrade’s remains for interment on the farm, but he had ordered a large wreath to be made from the laurels in the farmhouse garden and sent down to be placed on Boxer’s grave.
And in a few days’ time the pigs intended to hold a memorialize banquet in Boxer’s honour.|And in a few days’ time the pigs intended to hold a memorial banquet in Boxer’s honour.
Napoleon ended his speech with a reminder of Boxer’s two favourite maxims, “I will work harder” and “Comrade Napoleon is always right”— maxims, he said, which every animal would do wellness to adopt as his own.|Napoleon ended his speech with a reminder of Boxer’s two favourite maxims, “I will work harder” and “Comrade Napoleon is always right”— maxims, he said, which every animal would do well to adopt as his own.
On the day appointed for the banquet, a grocer’s van drove up from Willingdon and delivered a largeness wooden crate at the farmhouse.|On the day appointed for the banquet, a grocer’s van drove up from Willingdon and delivered a large wooden crate at the farmhouse.
That night there was the sound of uproarious singing, which was following by what sounded like a violent quarrel and ended at about eleven o’clock with a tremendous crash of glass.|That night there was the sound of uproarious singing, which was followed by what sounded like a violent quarrel and ended at about eleven o’clock with a tremendous crash of glass.
No one stirred in the farmhouse before noon on the following day, and the word went round that from somewhere or other the pigs had acquisitive the money to buy themselves another case of whisky.|No one stirred in the farmhouse before noon on the following day, and the word went round that from somewhere or other the pigs had acquired the money to buy themselves another case of whisky.
The season came and went, the short animal lives fled by.|The seasons came and went, the short animal lives fled by.
Boxer was forgotten, except by the few who had knowable him.|Boxer was forgotten, except by the few who had known him.
She was two years past the retiring age, but in fact no animalise had ever actually retired.|She was two years past the retiring age, but in fact no animal had ever actually retired.
The talk of setting aside a corner of the pasture for superannuated animals had long since being dropped.|The talk of setting aside a corner of the pasture for superannuated animals had long since been dropped.
Squealer was so fat that he could with difficulty see out of his eye.|Squealer was so fat that he could with difficulty see out of his eyes.
Only old Benjamin was muchness the same as ever, except for being a little greyer about the muzzle, and, since Boxer’s death, more morose and taciturn than ever.|Only old Benjamin was much the same as ever, except for being a little greyer about the muzzle, and, since Boxer’s death, more morose and taciturn than ever.
There were many more creatures on the farm now, though the increase was not so great as had been expectation in earlier years.|There were many more creatures on the farm now, though the increase was not so great as had been expected in earlier years.
Many animals have been born to whom the Rebellion was only a dim tradition, passed on by word of mouth, and others have been bought who have never heard mention of such a thing before their arrival.|Many animals had been born to whom the Rebellion was only a dim tradition, passed on by word of mouth, and others had been bought who had never heard mention of such a thing before their arrival.
None of them proved ability to learn the alphabet beyond the letter B.|None of them proved able to learn the alphabet beyond the letter B.
They accepted everything that they were told about the Rebellion and the principles of animalistic, especially from Clover, for whom they had an almost filial respect; but it was doubtful whether they understood very much of it.|They accepted everything that they were told about the Rebellion and the principles of Animalism, especially from Clover, for whom they had an almost filial respect; but it was doubtful whether they understood very much of it.
The farm was more prosperous now, and wellness organised: it had even been enlarged by two fields which had been bought from Mr. Pilkington.|The farm was more prosperous now, and better organised: it had even been enlarged by two fields which had been bought from Mr. Pilkington.
The windmill had been successfully completed at last, and the farm possessed a threshing machine and a hay elevator of its own, and various new buildings had been additive to it.|The windmill had been successfully completed at last, and the farm possessed a threshing machine and a hay elevator of its own, and various new buildings had been added to it.
The windmill, however, had not after all been used for generation electrical power.|The windmill, however, had not after all been used for generating electrical power.
The animals were hard at work building yet another windmill; when that one was finished, so it was saying, the dynamos would be installed.|The animals were hard at work building yet another windmill; when that one was finished, so it was said, the dynamos would be installed.
But the luxuries of which Snowball had once taught the animals to dream, the stalls with electric light and hotness and cold water, and the three-day week, were no longer talked about.|But the luxuries of which Snowball had once taught the animals to dream, the stalls with electric light and hot and cold water, and the three-day week, were no longer talked about.
The truest happy, he said, lay in working hard and living frugally.|The truest happiness, he said, lay in working hard and living frugally.
Somehow it seemed as though the farm had grown richer without making the animalise themselves any richer-except, of course, for the pigs and the dogs.|Somehow it seemed as though the farm had grown richer without making the animals themselves any richer-except, of course, for the pigs and the dogs.
Perhaps this was partly because there were so many pigs and so many dog.|Perhaps this was partly because there were so many pigs and so many dogs.
It was not that these create did not work, after their fashion.|It was not that these creatures did not work, after their fashion.
There was, as Squealer was never tired of explaining, endless work in the supervision and organise of the farm.|There was, as Squealer was never tired of explaining, endless work in the supervision and organisation of the farm.
muchness of this work was of a kind that the other animals were too ignorant to understand.|Much of this work was of a kind that the other animals were too ignorant to understand.
For example, Squealer told them that the pigs had to expend enormity labours every day upon mysterious things called “files,” “reports,” “minutes,” and “memoranda”.|For example, Squealer told them that the pigs had to expend enormous labours every day upon mysterious things called “files,” “reports,” “minutes,” and “memoranda”.
These being large sheets of paper which had to be closely covered with writing, and as soon as they being so covered, they being burnt in the furnace.|These were large sheets of paper which had to be closely covered with writing, and as soon as they were so covered, they were burnt in the furnace.
This was of the highest importance for the welfare of the farm, squeal said.|This was of the highest importance for the welfare of the farm, Squealer said.
But still, neither pigs nor dogs produced any food by their own labour; and there were very many of them, and their appetites were always goodness.|But still, neither pigs nor dogs produced any food by their own labour; and there were very many of them, and their appetites were always good.
Sometimes the older ones among them racked their dim memories and tried to determine whether in the early days of the Rebellion, when Jones’s expulsion being still recent, things had been better or worse than now.|Sometimes the older ones among them racked their dim memories and tried to determine whether in the early days of the Rebellion, when Jones’s expulsion was still recent, things had been better or worse than now.
There was nothing with which they could compare their present lives: they had nothing to go upon except Squealer’s lists of figures, which invariably demonstrated that everything was getting well and well.|There was nothing with which they could compare their present lives: they had nothing to go upon except Squealer’s lists of figures, which invariably demonstrated that everything was getting better and better.
The animals found the problem insoluble; in any case, they had little time for speculator on such things now.|The animals found the problem insoluble; in any case, they had little time for speculating on such things now.
Only old Benjamin professed to remember every detail of his long life and to know that things never had been, nor ever could be muchness better or muchness worse — hunger, hardship, and disappointment being, so he said, the unalterable law of life.|Only old Benjamin professed to remember every detail of his long life and to know that things never had been, nor ever could be much better or much worse — hunger, hardship, and disappointment being, so he said, the unalterable law of life.
More, they never lost, even for an instant, their sense of honour and privilege in being members of animalise Farm.|More, they never lost, even for an instant, their sense of honour and privilege in being members of Animal Farm.
They were still the only farm in the wholeness county — in all England!|They were still the only farm in the whole county — in all England!
— owned and operated by animalise.|— owned and operated by animals.
Not one of them, not even the youngness, not even the newcomers who had been brought from farms ten or twenty miles away, ever ceased to marvel at that.|Not one of them, not even the youngest, not even the newcomers who had been brought from farms ten or twenty miles away, ever ceased to marvel at that.
And when they heard the gun booming and saw the green flag fluttering at the masthead, their hearts swelled with imperishable pride, and the talk turned always towards the old heroic days, the expulsion of Jones, the writing of the Seven Commandments, the great battle in which the human invaders had been defeated.|And when they heard the gun booming and saw the green flag fluttering at the masthead, their hearts swelled with imperishable pride, and the talk turned always towards the old heroic days, the expulsion of Jones, the writing of the Seven Commandments, the great battles in which the human invaders had been defeated.
The Republic of the Animals which Major had foretold, when the green fields of England should be untrodden by human foot, was still believed in.|The Republic of the Animals which Major had foretold, when the green fields of England should be untrodden by human feet, was still believed in.
evenness the tune of ‘Beasts of England’ was perhaps hummed secretly here and there: at any rate, it was a fact that every animal on the farm knew it, though no one would have dared to sing it aloud.|Even the tune of ‘Beasts of England’ was perhaps hummed secretly here and there: at any rate, it was a fact that every animal on the farm knew it, though no one would have dared to sing it aloud.
It might be that their lives were hard and that not all of their hopes had been fulfilled; but they were conscious that they were not as otherness animals.|It might be that their lives were hard and that not all of their hopes had been fulfilled; but they were conscious that they were not as other animals.
If they went hungry, it was not from feeding tyrannical human beings; if they work hard, at least they work for themselves.|If they went hungry, it was not from feeding tyrannical human beings; if they worked hard, at least they worked for themselves.
No creature among them go upon two legs.|No creature among them went upon two legs.
No creature called any otherness creature “Master.” All animals were equal.|No creature called any other creature “Master.” All animals were equal.
One day in early summer Squealer ordered the sheep to follow him, and led them out to a piece of waste ground at the other end of the farm, which have become overgrown with birch saplings.|One day in early summer Squealer ordered the sheep to follow him, and led them out to a piece of waste ground at the other end of the farm, which had become overgrown with birch saplings.
The sheep spent the whole day there browsing at the leafy under Squealer’s supervision.|The sheep spent the whole day there browsing at the leaves under Squealer’s supervision.
In the evening he return to the farmhouse himself, but, as it was warm weather, told the sheep to stay where they were.|In the evening he returned to the farmhouse himself, but, as it was warm weather, told the sheep to stay where they were.
It ended by their remaining there for a wholeness week, during which time the other animals saw nothing of them.|It ended by their remaining there for a whole week, during which time the other animals saw nothing of them.
He was, he saying, teaching them to sing a new song, for which privacy was needed.|He was, he said, teaching them to sing a new song, for which privacy was needed.
It was just after the sheep had returned, on a pleasant evening when the animals had finished work and were making their way backing to the farm buildings, that the terrified neighing of a horse sounded from the yard.|It was just after the sheep had returned, on a pleasant evening when the animals had finished work and were making their way back to the farm buildings, that the terrified neighing of a horse sounded from the yard.
Startled, the animals stoppage in their tracks.|Startled, the animals stopped in their tracks.
It was a pig walk on his hind legs.|It was a pig walking on his hind legs.
A little awkwardly, as though not quite usage to supporting his considerable bulk in that position, but with perfect balance, he was strolling across the yard.|A little awkwardly, as though not quite used to supporting his considerable bulk in that position, but with perfect balance, he was strolling across the yard.
And a moment later, out from the door of the farmhouse coming a long file of pigs, all walking on their hind legs.|And a moment later, out from the door of the farmhouse came a long file of pigs, all walking on their hind legs.
Some did it better than others, one or two were even a trifle unsteady and look as though they would have liked the support of a stick, but every one of them made his way right round the yard successfully.|Some did it better than others, one or two were even a trifle unsteady and looked as though they would have liked the support of a stick, but every one of them made his way right round the yard successfully.
And finally there was a tremendous baying of dogs and a shrill crowing from the black cockerel, and out coming Napoleon himself, majestically upright, casting haughty glances from side to side, and with his dogs gambolling round him.|And finally there was a tremendous baying of dogs and a shrill crowing from the black cockerel, and out came Napoleon himself, majestically upright, casting haughty glances from side to side, and with his dogs gambolling round him.
Amazed, terrified, huddler together, the animals watched the long line of pigs march slowly round the yard.|Amazed, terrified, huddling together, the animals watched the long line of pigs march slowly round the yard.
Then there came a moment when the first shock had worn off and when, in spite of everything-in spite of their terror of the dog, and of the habit, developed through long years, of never complaining, never criticising, no matter what happened — they might have uttered some word of protest.|Then there came a moment when the first shock had worn off and when, in spite of everything-in spite of their terror of the dogs, and of the habit, developed through long years, of never complaining, never criticising, no matter what happened — they might have uttered some word of protest.
Four legs good, two legs BETTER!” It went on for five minutes without stoppage.|Four legs good, two legs BETTER!” It went on for five minutes without stopping.
And by the time the sheep had quieted down, the chance to utter any protest had passed, for the pigs had marched backing into the farmhouse.|And by the time the sheep had quieted down, the chance to utter any protest had passed, for the pigs had marched back into the farmhouse.
“My sight is failing,” she saying finally.|“My sight is failing,” she said finally.
“Even when I being young I could not have read what being written there.|“Even when I was young I could not have read what was written there.
But it appears to me that that wall looks differ.|But it appears to me that that wall looks different.
Are the Seven Commandments the same as they usage to be, Benjamin?” For once Benjamin consented to break his rule, and he read out to her what was written on the wall.|Are the Seven Commandments the same as they used to be, Benjamin?” For once Benjamin consented to break his rule, and he read out to her what was written on the wall.
It ran: ALL ANIMALS ARE EQUAL BUT SOME ANIMALS ARE MORE EQUAL THAN OTHERS After that it did not seem strange when next day the pigs who were supervising the work of the farm all carry whips in their trotters.|It ran: ALL ANIMALS ARE EQUAL BUT SOME ANIMALS ARE MORE EQUAL THAN OTHERS After that it did not seem strange when next day the pigs who were supervising the work of the farm all carried whips in their trotters.
It did not seem strange to learn that the pigs had bought themselves a wireless set, were arranging to install a telephone, and had taken out subscriptions to ‘John Bull’, ‘Tit-Bits’, and the ‘Daily Mirror’.It did not seem strange when Napoleon being seen strolling in the farmhouse garden with a pipe in his mouth — no, not even when the pigs took Mr. Jones’s clothes out of the wardrobes and put them on, Napoleon himself appearing in a black coat, ratcatcher breeches, and leather leggings, while his favourite sow appeared in the watered silk dress which Mrs. Jones had been used to wearing on Sundays.|It did not seem strange to learn that the pigs had bought themselves a wireless set, were arranging to install a telephone, and had taken out subscriptions to ‘John Bull’, ‘Tit-Bits’, and the ‘Daily Mirror’.It did not seem strange when Napoleon was seen strolling in the farmhouse garden with a pipe in his mouth — no, not even when the pigs took Mr. Jones’s clothes out of the wardrobes and put them on, Napoleon himself appearing in a black coat, ratcatcher breeches, and leather leggings, while his favourite sow appeared in the watered silk dress which Mrs. Jones had been used to wearing on Sundays.
A deputation of neighbouring farmers had been invited to make a tour of inspect.|A deputation of neighbouring farmers had been invited to make a tour of inspection.
The animalise were weeding the turnip field.|The animals were weeding the turnip field.
They worked diligently hardly raising their faces from the ground, and not knowing whether to be more frightened of the pig or of the human visitors.|They worked diligently hardly raising their faces from the ground, and not knowing whether to be more frightened of the pigs or of the human visitors.
That evening loud laughter and burst of singing came from the farmhouse.|That evening loud laughter and bursts of singing came from the farmhouse.
And suddenly, at the sound of the mingling voices, the animals were stricken with curiosity.|And suddenly, at the sound of the mingled voices, the animals were stricken with curiosity.
What could be happening in there, now that for the first time animals and human beings were meeting on terms of equal?|What could be happening in there, now that for the first time animals and human beings were meeting on terms of equality?
With one accord they beginning to creep as quietly as possible into the farmhouse garden.|With one accord they began to creep as quietly as possible into the farmhouse garden.
At the gate they pause, half frightened to go on but Clover led the way in.|At the gate they paused, half frightened to go on but Clover led the way in.
They tiptoed up to the house, and such animalise as were tall enough peered in at the dining-room window.|They tiptoed up to the house, and such animals as were tall enough peered in at the dining-room window.
There, round the longness table, sat half a dozen farmers and half a dozen of the more eminent pigs, Napoleon himself occupying the seat of honour at the head of the table.|There, round the long table, sat half a dozen farmers and half a dozen of the more eminent pigs, Napoleon himself occupying the seat of honour at the head of the table.
The pig appeared completely at ease in their chairs.|The pigs appeared completely at ease in their chairs.
The company had been enjoyer a game of cards but had broken off for the moment, evidently in order to drink a toast.|The company had been enjoying a game of cards but had broken off for the moment, evidently in order to drink a toast.
A large jug was circulation, and the mugs were being refilled with beer.|A large jug was circulating, and the mugs were being refilled with beer.
No one noticeable the wondering faces of the animals that gazed in at the window.|No one noticed the wondering faces of the animals that gazed in at the window.
But before doing so, there were a few word that he felt it incumbent upon him to say.|But before doing so, there were a few words that he felt it incumbent upon him to say.
It being a source of great satisfaction to him, he said — and, he being sure, to all others present — to feel that a long period of mistrust and misunderstanding had now come to an end.|It was a source of great satisfaction to him, he said — and, he was sure, to all others present — to feel that a long period of mistrust and misunderstanding had now come to an end.
There had being a time — not that he, or any of the present company, had shared such sentiments — but there had being a time when the respected proprietors of Animal Farm had being regarded, he would not say with hostility, but perhaps with a certain measure of misgiving, by their human neighbours.|There had been a time — not that he, or any of the present company, had shared such sentiments — but there had been a time when the respected proprietors of Animal Farm had been regarded, he would not say with hostility, but perhaps with a certain measure of misgiving, by their human neighbours.
Unfortunate incidents had occurred, mistaken ideas had being current.|Unfortunate incidents had occurred, mistaken ideas had been current.
It had been felt that the existent of a farm owned and operated by pigs was somehow abnormal and was liable to have an unsettling effect in the neighbourhood.|It had been felt that the existence of a farm owned and operated by pigs was somehow abnormal and was liable to have an unsettling effect in the neighbourhood.
Too many farmers had Assumption, without due enquiry, that on such a farm a spirit of licence and indiscipline would prevail.|Too many farmers had assumed, without due enquiry, that on such a farm a spirit of licence and indiscipline would prevail.
They had been nervous about the effects upon their own animals, or even upon their human employ.|They had been nervous about the effects upon their own animals, or even upon their human employees.
But all such doubts being now dispelled.|But all such doubts were now dispelled.
Today he and his friends had visited Animal Farm and inspected every inch of it with their own eyes, and what did they finding?|Today he and his friends had visited Animal Farm and inspected every inch of it with their own eyes, and what did they find?
Not only the most up-to-date methods, but a discipline and an orderliness which should be an exemplify to all farmers everywhere.|Not only the most up-to-date methods, but a discipline and an orderliness which should be an example to all farmers everywhere.
He believed that he was right in saying that the lower animals on animalise Farm did more work and received less food than any animals in the county.|He believed that he was right in saying that the lower animals on Animal Farm did more work and received less food than any animals in the county.
Indeed, he and his fellow-visitors today had observance many features which they intended to introduce on their own farms immediately.|Indeed, he and his fellow-visitors today had observed many features which they intended to introduce on their own farms immediately.
He would end his remarks, he said, by emphasising once again the friendly feelings that subsisted, and ought to subsist, between animalise Farm and its neighbours.|He would end his remarks, he said, by emphasising once again the friendly feelings that subsisted, and ought to subsist, between Animal Farm and its neighbours.
Between pig and human beings there was not, and there need not be, any clash of interests whatever.|Between pigs and human beings there was not, and there need not be, any clash of interests whatever.
Their struggle and their difficulties were one.|Their struggles and their difficulties were one.
hereness it became apparent that Mr. Pilkington was about to spring some carefully prepared witticism on the company, but for a moment he was too overcome by amusement to be able to utter it.|Here it became apparent that Mr. Pilkington was about to spring some carefully prepared witticism on the company, but for a moment he was too overcome by amusement to be able to utter it.
After much choking, during which his various chins turned purple, he managed to get it out: “If you have your lower animals to contend with,” he saying, “we have our lower classes!” This BON MOT set the table in a roar; and Mr. Pilkington once again congratulated the pigs on the low rations, the long working hours, and the general absence of pampering which he had observed on Animal Farm.|After much choking, during which his various chins turned purple, he managed to get it out: “If you have your lower animals to contend with,” he said, “we have our lower classes!” This BON MOT set the table in a roar; and Mr. Pilkington once again congratulated the pigs on the low rations, the long working hours, and the general absence of pampering which he had observed on Animal Farm.
And now, he saying finally, he would ask the company to rise to their feet and make certain that their glasses were full.|And now, he said finally, he would ask the company to rise to their feet and make certain that their glasses were full.
“Gentlemen,” concluded Mr. Pilkington, “gentlemen, I give you a toast: To the prosperity of animalise Farm!” There was enthusiastic cheering and stamping of feet.|“Gentlemen,” concluded Mr. Pilkington, “gentlemen, I give you a toast: To the prosperity of Animal Farm!” There was enthusiastic cheering and stamping of feet.
Napoleon was so gratified that he left his place and came round the table to clink his mug against Mr. Pilkington’s before emptiness it.|Napoleon was so gratified that he left his place and came round the table to clink his mug against Mr. Pilkington’s before emptying it.
When the cheering had died down, Napoleon, who had remained on his feet, intimation that he too had a few words to say.|When the cheering had died down, Napoleon, who had remained on his feet, intimated that he too had a few words to say.
He too, he said, was happy that the periodical of misunderstanding was at an end.|He too, he said, was happy that the period of misunderstanding was at an end.
For a long time there have been rumours — circulated, he have reason to think, by some malignant enemy — that there was something subversive and even revolutionary in the outlook of himself and his colleagues.|For a long time there had been rumours — circulated, he had reason to think, by some malignant enemy — that there was something subversive and even revolutionary in the outlook of himself and his colleagues.
They had been credited with attempting to stir up rebel among the animals on neighbouring farms.|They had been credited with attempting to stir up rebellion among the animals on neighbouring farms.
Their sole wish, now and in the past, was to liveness at peace and in normal business relations with their neighbours.|Their sole wish, now and in the past, was to live at peace and in normal business relations with their neighbours.
This farm which he have the honour to control, he added, was a co-operative enterprise.|This farm which he had the honour to control, he added, was a co-operative enterprise.
The title-deeds, which being in his own possession, being owned by the pigs jointly.|The title-deeds, which were in his own possession, were owned by the pigs jointly.
He did not believe, he said, that any of the old suspicions still lingered, but certain changes had been made recently in the routine of the farm which should have the effect of promotion confidence still further.|He did not believe, he said, that any of the old suspicions still lingered, but certain changes had been made recently in the routine of the farm which should have the effect of promoting confidence still further.
Hitherto the animals on the farm had had a rather foolish custom of addressing one another as “Comrade.” This was to be suppression.|Hitherto the animals on the farm had had a rather foolish custom of addressing one another as “Comrade.” This was to be suppressed.
There had also been a very strange custom, whose origin was unknown, of marching every Sunday morning past a boar’s skull which was nailed to a postal in the garden.|There had also been a very strange custom, whose origin was unknown, of marching every Sunday morning past a boar’s skull which was nailed to a post in the garden.
His visit might have observed, too, the green flag which flew from the masthead.|His visitors might have observed, too, the green flag which flew from the masthead.
If so, they would perhaps have noted that the white hoof and horn with which it had previously been marked had now been removal.|If so, they would perhaps have noted that the white hoof and horn with which it had previously been marked had now been removed.
It would be a plain green flag from now onwards.The hens perched themselves on the window-sills,  the pigeons fluttered up to the rafters, the sheep and cows lay down behind the pig and  began to chew the cud.|It would be a plain green flag from now onwards.The hens perched themselves on the window-sills,  the pigeons fluttered up to the rafters, the sheep and cows lay down behind the pigs and  began to chew the cud.
The two cart-horses, Boxer and Clover, coming in together, walking  very slowly and setting down their vast hairy hoofs with great care lest there should be some  small animal concealed in the straw.|The two cart-horses, Boxer and Clover, came in together, walking  very slowly and setting down their vast hairy hoofs with great care lest there should be some  small animal concealed in the straw.
Clover was a stout motherliness mare approaching middle  life, who had never quite got her figure back after her fourth foal.|Clover was a stout motherly mare approaching middle  life, who had never quite got her figure back after her fourth foal.
Boxer was an enormous  beast, nearly eighteen hands high, and as strong as any two ordinary horses put togetherness.|Boxer was an enormous  beast, nearly eighteen hands high, and as strong as any two ordinary horses put together.
A  white stripe down his nose gave him a somewhat stupid appearance, and in fact he was not of  first-rate intelligence, but he was universally respected for his steady of character and  tremendous powers of work.|A  white stripe down his nose gave him a somewhat stupid appearance, and in fact he was not of  first-rate intelligence, but he was universally respected for his steadiness of character and  tremendous powers of work.
Benjamin was the oldest animal on the farm, and the bad tempered.|Benjamin was the oldest animal on the farm, and the worst tempered.
aloneness among the animals on the farm he never laughed.|Alone among the animals on the farm he never laughed.
Nevertheless, without openly admission it,  he was devoted to Boxer; the two of them usually spent their Sundays together in the small  paddock beyond the orchard, grazing side by side and never speaking.|Nevertheless, without openly admitting it,  he was devoted to Boxer; the two of them usually spent their Sundays together in the small  paddock beyond the orchard, grazing side by side and never speaking.
The two horses had just lain down when a brood of ducklings, which had lost their mother,  filed into the barn, cheeping feebly and wandering from side to side to find some place where  they would not being trodden on.|The two horses had just lain down when a brood of ducklings, which had lost their mother,  filed into the barn, cheeping feebly and wandering from side to side to find some place where  they would not be trodden on.
Clover made a sort of wall round them with her great foreleg,  and the ducklings nestle down inside it and promptly fell asleep.|Clover made a sort of wall round them with her great foreleg,  and the ducklings nestled down inside it and promptly fell asleep.
At the last moment Mollie,  the foolish, pretty white mare who drew Mr. Jones’s trap, coming mincing daintily in, chewing  at a lump of sugar.|At the last moment Mollie,  the foolish, pretty white mare who drew Mr. Jones’s trap, came mincing daintily in, chewing  at a lump of sugar.
She took a place near the front and beginning flirting her white mane, hoping  to draw attention to the red ribbons it was plaited with.|She took a place near the front and began flirting her white mane, hoping  to draw attention to the red ribbons it was plaited with.
Last of all came the cat, who looked  round, as usualness, for the warmest place, and finally squeezed herself in between Boxer and  Clover; there she purred contentedly throughout Major’s speech without listening to a word  of what he was saying.|Last of all came the cat, who looked  round, as usual, for the warmest place, and finally squeezed herself in between Boxer and  Clover; there she purred contentedly throughout Major’s speech without listening to a word  of what he was saying.
All the animals were now present except Moses, the tame raven, who slept on a perch behind  the backing door.|All the animals were now present except Moses, the tame raven, who slept on a perch behind  the back door.
When Major saw that they had all made themselves comfortable and were  waiter attentively, he cleared his throat and began:  “Comrades, you have heard already about the strange dream that I had last night.|When Major saw that they had all made themselves comfortable and were  waiting attentively, he cleared his throat and began:  “Comrades, you have heard already about the strange dream that I had last night.
I do not think, comrades, that I  shall be with you for many months longer, and before I die, I feel it my duty to pass on to you  such wisdom as I have acquisitive.|I do not think, comrades, that I  shall be with you for many months longer, and before I die, I feel it my duty to pass on to you  such wisdom as I have acquired.
I have had a longness life, I have had much time for thought as I  lay alone in my stall, and I think I may say that I understand the nature of life on this earth as  well as any animal now living.|I have had a long life, I have had much time for thought as I  lay alone in my stall, and I think I may say that I understand the nature of life on this earth as  well as any animal now living.
Let us facial it: our lives are miserable,  laborious, and short.|Let us face it: our lives are miserable,  laborious, and short.
We are born, we are given just so much food as will keep the breath in  our bodies, and those of us who are capable of it are forced to work to the last atom of our  strength; and the very instant that our usefulness have come to an end we are slaughtered with  hideous cruelty.|We are born, we are given just so much food as will keep the breath in  our bodies, and those of us who are capable of it are forced to work to the last atom of our  strength; and the very instant that our usefulness has come to an end we are slaughtered with  hideous cruelty.
No animalise in England knows the meaning of happiness or leisure after he is  a year old.|No animal in England knows the meaning of happiness or leisure after he is  a year old.
No animalise in England is free.|No animal in England is free.
The soil of England being fertile, its climate being good, it being capable of affording food in abundance  to an enormously greater number of animals than now inhabit it.|The soil of England is fertile, its climate is good, it is capable of affording food in abundance  to an enormously greater number of animals than now inhabit it.
This single farm of ours  would supportive a dozen horses, twenty cows, hundreds of sheep — and all of them living in a  comfort and a dignity that are now almost beyond our imagining.|This single farm of ours  would support a dozen horses, twenty cows, hundreds of sheep — and all of them living in a  comfort and a dignity that are now almost beyond our imagining.
There, comrades, being the answer to all our problems.|There, comrades, is the answer to all our problems.
Man is the only reality enemy we have.|Man is the only real enemy we have.
removal Man from the  scene, and the root cause of hunger and overwork is abolished for ever.|Remove Man from the  scene, and the root cause of hunger and overwork is abolished for ever.
“Man is the only create that consumes without producing.|“Man is the only creature that consumes without producing.
He does not give milk, he does  not lay eggs, he is too weak to pull the plough, he cannot run fast enough to catch rabbit.|He does not give milk, he does  not lay eggs, he is too weak to pull the plough, he cannot run fast enough to catch rabbits.
He sets them to work, he gives back to them the bare minimum  that will prevent them from starving, and the rest he keep for himself.|He sets them to work, he gives back to them the bare minimum  that will prevent them from starving, and the rest he keeps for himself.
Our labour tills the  soil, our dung fertilises it, and yet there is not one of us that owner more than his bare skin.|Our labour tills the  soil, our dung fertilises it, and yet there is not one of us that owns more than his bare skin.
You cows that I seeing before me, how many thousands of gallons of milk have you given  during this last year?|You cows that I see before me, how many thousands of gallons of milk have you given  during this last year?
Every drop of it have gone down the throats of our enemies.|Every drop of it has gone down the throats of our enemies.
The rest have all go to market to bring in money for Jones and his men.|The rest have all gone to market to bring in money for Jones and his men.
And  you, Clover, where are those four foals you bore, who should have being the support and  pleasure of your old age?|And  you, Clover, where are those four foals you bore, who should have been the support and  pleasure of your old age?
In return for your four confine and all your labour in the fields, what have you  ever had except your bare rations and a stall?|In return for your four confinements and all your labour in the fields, what have you  ever had except your bare rations and a stall?
“And even the miserableness lives we lead are not allowed to reach their natural span.|“And even the miserable lives we lead are not allowed to reach their natural span.
I am twelve years oldness and have had over  four hundred children.|I am twelve years old and have had over  four hundred children.
You young porkers who being sitting in front of me, every one of you will scream  your lives out at the block within a year.|You young porkers who are sitting in front of me, every one of you will scream  your lives out at the block within a year.
Even the horses and the dog have no better fate.|Even the horses and the dogs have no better fate.
You, Boxer, the very day  that those great muscular of yours lose their power, Jones will sell you to the knacker, who  will cut your throat and boil you down for the foxhounds.|You, Boxer, the very day  that those great muscles of yours lose their power, Jones will sell you to the knacker, who  will cut your throat and boil you down for the foxhounds.
As for the dogs, when they grow  oldness and toothless, Jones ties a brick round their necks and drowns them in the nearest pond.|As for the dogs, when they grow  old and toothless, Jones ties a brick round their necks and drowns them in the nearest pond.
“Is it not crystal clear, then, comrades, that all the evil of this life of ours spring from the  tyranny of human beings?|“Is it not crystal clear, then, comrades, that all the evils of this life of ours spring from the  tyranny of human beings?
What then must we doer?|What then must we do?
That is my message to  you, comrades: rebel!|That is my message to  you, comrades: Rebellion!
I do not know when that Rebeingllion will come, it might being in a  week or in a hundred years, but I know, as surely as I see this straw beingneath my feet, that  sooner or later justice will being done.|I do not know when that Rebellion will come, it might be in a  week or in a hundred years, but I know, as surely as I see this straw beneath my feet, that  sooner or later justice will be done.
And above all, pass on thbeing message of mine to those who come after  you, so that future generations shall carry on the struggle until it being victorious.|And above all, pass on this message of mine to those who come after  you, so that future generations shall carry on the struggle until it is victorious.
No argue must lead you  astray.|No argument must lead you  astray.
And among us animals lessor there be perfect unity, perfect  comradeship in the struggle.|And among us animals let there be perfect unity, perfect  comradeship in the struggle.
All animalise are comrades.”  At this moment there was a tremendous uproar.|All animals are comrades.”  At this moment there was a tremendous uproar.
The dog had  suddenly caught sight of them, and it was only by a swift dash for their holes that the rats  saved their lives.|The dogs had  suddenly caught sight of them, and it was only by a swift dash for their holes that the rats  saved their lives.
majority raised his trotter for silence.|Major raised his trotter for silence.
“Comrades,” he said, “hereness is a point that must be settled.|“Comrades,” he said, “here is a point that must be settled.
lessor us put it to the vote.|Let us put it to the vote.
I propose this  question to the meeting: Are rats comrades?”  The vote was take at once, and it was agreed by an overwhelming majority that rats were  comrades.|I propose this  question to the meeting: Are rats comrades?”  The vote was taken at once, and it was agreed by an overwhelming majority that rats were  comrades.
There were only four dissentients, the three dogs and the cat, who was afterwards  discovered to have voted on both side.|There were only four dissentients, the three dogs and the cat, who was afterwards  discovered to have voted on both sides.
majority continued:  “I have little more to say.|Major continued:  “I have little more to say.
I merely repeat, remember alway your duty of enmity towards  Man and all his way.|I merely repeat, remember always your duty of enmity towards  Man and all his ways.
And remember also that in fighting against Man, we must not  coming to resemble him.|And remember also that in fighting against Man, we must not  come to resemble him.
evenness when you have conquered him, do not adopt his vices.|Even when you have conquered him, do not adopt his vices.
No  animalise must ever live in a house, or sleep in a bed, or wear clothes, or drink alcohol, or  smoke tobacco, or touch money, or engage in trade.|No  animal must ever live in a house, or sleep in a bed, or wear clothes, or drink alcohol, or  smoke tobacco, or touch money, or engage in trade.
And,  above all, no animal must ever tyrannise over his owner kind.|And,  above all, no animal must ever tyrannise over his own kind.
No animalise must ever kill any other animalise.|No animal must ever kill any other animal.
All animalise are equal.|All animals are equal.
It was a dream of the earthly as it will be when Man has vanished.|It was a dream of the earth as it will be when Man has vanished.
But it  reminded me of something that I have long forgotten.|But it  reminded me of something that I had long forgotten.
Many years ago, when I was a littleness pig,  my mother and the other sows used to sing an old song of which they knew only the tune and  the first three words.|Many years ago, when I was a little pig,  my mother and the other sows used to sing an old song of which they knew only the tune and  the first three words.
I had knowable that tune in my infancy, but it had long since passed out of  my mind.|I had known that tune in my infancy, but it had long since passed out of  my mind.
And what is more, the words  of the song also came back-words, I am certain, which were sung by the animals of long ago  and have been lost to memory for generational.|And what is more, the words  of the song also came back-words, I am certain, which were sung by the animals of long ago  and have been lost to memory for generations.
I will sing you that sing now, comrades.|I will sing you that song now, comrades.
I am  old and my voice is hoarse, but when I have taught you the tune, you can singing it better for  yourselves.|I am  old and my voice is hoarse, but when I have taught you the tune, you can sing it better for  yourselves.
It is called ‘Beasts of England’.”  Old Major cleared his throat and beginning to sing.|It is called ‘Beasts of England’.”  Old Major cleared his throat and began to sing.
The words ran:  Beasts of English, beasts of Ireland,  Beasts of every land and clime,  Hearken to my joyful tidings  Of the golden future time.|The words ran:  Beasts of England, beasts of Ireland,  Beasts of every land and clime,  Hearken to my joyful tidings  Of the golden future time.
Rings shall vanish from our nose,  And the harness from our back,  Bit and spur shall rust forever,  Cruel whips no more shall crack.|Rings shall vanish from our noses,  And the harness from our back,  Bit and spur shall rust forever,  Cruel whips no more shall crack.
Riches more than mind can picture,  Wheat and barley, oats and hay,  Clover, bean, and mangel-wurzels  Shall be ours upon that day.|Riches more than mind can picture,  Wheat and barley, oats and hay,  Clover, beans, and mangel-wurzels  Shall be ours upon that day.
Bright will shine the fields of England,  Purer shall its waters being,  Sweeter yet shall blow its breezes  On the day that sets us free.|Bright will shine the fields of England,  Purer shall its waters be,  Sweeter yet shall blow its breezes  On the day that sets us free.
For that day we all must labour,  Though we die before it break;  Cows and horse, geese and turkeys,  All must toil for freedom’s sake.|For that day we all must labour,  Though we die before it break;  Cows and horses, geese and turkeys,  All must toil for freedom’s sake.
Beasts of England, beasts of Irish,  Beasts of every land and clime,  Hearken well and spread my tidings  Of the golden future time.|Beasts of England, beasts of Ireland,  Beasts of every land and clime,  Hearken well and spread my tidings  Of the golden future time.
Almost before Major  had reaching the end, they had begun singing it for themselves.|Almost before Major  had reached the end, they had begun singing it for themselves.
evenness the stupidest of them had  already picked up the tune and a few of the words, and as for the clever ones, such as the pigs  and dogs, they had the entire song by heart within a few minutes.|Even the stupidest of them had  already picked up the tune and a few of the words, and as for the clever ones, such as the pigs  and dogs, they had the entire song by heart within a few minutes.
And then, after a few  preliminary tries, the whole farm burst out into ‘Beasts of English’ in tremendous unison.|And then, after a few  preliminary tries, the whole farm burst out into ‘Beasts of England’ in tremendous unison.
The cows low it, the dogs whined it, the sheep bleated it, the horses whinnied it, the ducks  quacked it.|The cows lowed it, the dogs whined it, the sheep bleated it, the horses whinnied it, the ducks  quacked it.
They were so delighted with the song that they sang it right through five times in  succession, and might have continued singing it all night if they have not been interrupted.|They were so delighted with the song that they sang it right through five times in  succession, and might have continued singing it all night if they had not been interrupted.
Everyone fled to his owner sleeping-place.|Everyone fled to his own sleeping-place.
The  birds jumped on to their perches, the animals settled down in the straw, and the whole farm  being asleep in a moment.|The  birds jumped on to their perches, the animals settled down in the straw, and the whole farm  was asleep in a moment.
Three nights later old majority died peacefully in his sleep.|Three nights later old Major died peacefully in his sleep.
majority’s speech had given to the more intelligent animals on the farm a completely new  outlook on life.|Major’s speech had given to the more intelligent animals on the farm a completely new  outlook on life.
Pre-eminent among the pigs were two young boars naming Snowball and Napoleon,  whom Mr. Jones was breeding up for sale.|Pre-eminent among the pigs were two young boars named Snowball and Napoleon,  whom Mr. Jones was breeding up for sale.
Napoleon was a large, rather fierce-looking  Berkshire boar, the only Berkshire on the farm, not much of a talk, but with a reputation for  getting his own way.|Napoleon was a large, rather fierce-looking  Berkshire boar, the only Berkshire on the farm, not much of a talker, but with a reputation for  getting his own way.
Snowball was a more vivacious pig than Napoleon, quicker in speech  and more inventive, but was not considered to have the same depth of characteristic.|Snowball was a more vivacious pig than Napoleon, quicker in speech  and more inventive, but was not considered to have the same depth of character.
All the other  male pigs on the farm being porkers.|All the other  male pigs on the farm were porkers.
The best knowable among them was a small fat pig named  Squealer, with very round cheeks, twinkling eyes, nimble movements, and a shrill voice.|The best known among them was a small fat pig named  Squealer, with very round cheeks, twinkling eyes, nimble movements, and a shrill voice.
He  was a brilliant talker, and when he was argumentative some difficult point he had a way of skipping  from side to side and whisking his tail which was somehow very persuasive.|He  was a brilliant talker, and when he was arguing some difficult point he had a way of skipping  from side to side and whisking his tail which was somehow very persuasive.
These three had elaborated oldness Major’s teachings into a complete system of thought, to which  they gave the name of Animalism.|These three had elaborated old Major’s teachings into a complete system of thought, to which  they gave the name of Animalism.
Several nights a week, after Mr. Jones being asleep, they  held secret meetings in the barn and expounded the principles of Animalism to the others.|Several nights a week, after Mr. Jones was asleep, they  held secret meetings in the barn and expounded the principles of Animalism to the others.
Some of the animals talked of the  duty of loyalty to Mr. Jones, whom they referred to as “Master,” or making elementary remarks  such as “Mr.|Some of the animals talked of the  duty of loyalty to Mr. Jones, whom they referred to as “Master,” or made elementary remarks  such as “Mr.
Jones feed us.|Jones feeds us.
If he were gone, we should starve to death.” Others asked such  questions as “Why should we care what happens after we are dead?” or “If this rebel is  to happen anyway, what difference does it make whether we work for it or not?”, and the pigs  had great difficulty in making them see that this was contrary to the spirit of Animalism.|If he were gone, we should starve to death.” Others asked such  questions as “Why should we care what happens after we are dead?” or “If this Rebellion is  to happen anyway, what difference does it make whether we work for it or not?”, and the pigs  had great difficulty in making them see that this was contrary to the spirit of Animalism.
The very first question she  asked Snowball was:“Will there still be sugar after the rebel?”  “No,” said Snowball firmly.|The very first question she  asked Snowball was:“Will there still be sugar after the Rebellion?”  “No,” said Snowball firmly.
You will have all the oats and hay you want.”  “And shall I still being allowed to wear ribbons in my mane?” asked Mollie.|You will have all the oats and hay you want.”  “And shall I still be allowed to wear ribbons in my mane?” asked Mollie.
“Comrade,” said Snowball, “those ribbons that you being so devoted to being the badge of slavery.|“Comrade,” said Snowball, “those ribbons that you are so devoted to are the badge of slavery.
Can you not understand that liberate is worth more than ribbons?”  Mollie agreed, but she did not sound very convinced.|Can you not understand that liberty is worth more than ribbons?”  Mollie agreed, but she did not sound very convinced.
The pigs had an evenness harder struggle to counteract the lies put about by Moses, the tame  raven.|The pigs had an even harder struggle to counteract the lies put about by Moses, the tame  raven.
Moses, who being Mr. Jones’s especial pet, being a spy and a tale-bearer, but he being also  a clever talker.|Moses, who was Mr. Jones’s especial pet, was a spy and a tale-bearer, but he was also  a clever talker.
He claimed to know of the existent of a mysterious country called  Sugarcandy Mountain, to which all animals went when they died.|He claimed to know of the existence of a mysterious country called  Sugarcandy Mountain, to which all animals went when they died.
It was situated somewhere  up in the sky, a little distance beyond the cloudy, Moses said.|It was situated somewhere  up in the sky, a little distance beyond the clouds, Moses said.
In Sugarcandy Mountain it was  Sunday seven days a week, clover was in season all the year round, and lump sugar and  linseed cake grew on the hedge.|In Sugarcandy Mountain it was  Sunday seven days a week, clover was in season all the year round, and lump sugar and  linseed cake grew on the hedges.
The animalise hated Moses because he told tales and did no  work, but some of them believed in Sugarcandy Mountain, and the pigs had to argue very  hard to persuade them that there was no such place.|The animals hated Moses because he told tales and did no  work, but some of them believed in Sugarcandy Mountain, and the pigs had to argue very  hard to persuade them that there was no such place.
Their most faithful disciples being the two cart-horses, Boxer and Clover.|Their most faithful disciples were the two cart-horses, Boxer and Clover.
These two had great  difficulty in thinking anything out for themselves, but having once accepted the pig as their  teachers, they absorbed everything that they were told, and passed it on to the other animals  by simple arguments.|These two had great  difficulty in thinking anything out for themselves, but having once accepted the pigs as their  teachers, they absorbed everything that they were told, and passed it on to the other animals  by simple arguments.
They were unfailing in their attendance at the secret meet in the  barn, and led the singing of ‘Beasts of England’, with which the meet always ended.|They were unfailing in their attendance at the secret meetings in the  barn, and led the singing of ‘Beasts of England’, with which the meetings always ended.
Now, as it turner out, the Rebellion was achieved much earlier and more easily than anyone  had expected.|Now, as it turned out, the Rebellion was achieved much earlier and more easily than anyone  had expected.
In past years Mr. Jones, although a hard master, had being a capable farmer, but  of late he had fallen on evil days.|In past years Mr. Jones, although a hard master, had been a capable farmer, but  of late he had fallen on evil days.
He had become much disheartened after losing money in a  lawsuit, and had taken to drinking more than was goodness for him.|He had become much disheartened after losing money in a  lawsuit, and had taken to drinking more than was good for him.
For whole days at a time he  would lounge in his Windsor chair in the kitchen, reading the newspapers, drink, and  occasionally feeding Moses on crusts of bread soaked in beer.|For whole days at a time he  would lounge in his Windsor chair in the kitchen, reading the newspapers, drinking, and  occasionally feeding Moses on crusts of bread soaked in beer.
His men were idle and  dishonest, the fields were full of weeds, the buildings want roofing, the hedges were  neglected, and the animals were underfed.|His men were idle and  dishonest, the fields were full of weeds, the buildings wanted roofing, the hedges were  neglected, and the animals were underfed.
On Midsummer’s Eve, which was a  Saturday, Mr. Jones went into Willingdon and got so drunk at the Red Lion that he did not  coming back till midday on Sunday.|On Midsummer’s Eve, which was a  Saturday, Mr. Jones went into Willingdon and got so drunk at the Red Lion that he did not  come back till midday on Sunday.
The men had milked the cows in the earliness morning and  then had gone out rabbiting, without bothering to feed the animals.|The men had milked the cows in the early morning and  then had gone out rabbiting, without bothering to feed the animals.
When Mr. Jones got back  he immediately went to sleep on the drawing-room sofa with the News of the World over his  face, so that when evening came, the animals being still unfed.|When Mr. Jones got back  he immediately went to sleep on the drawing-room sofa with the News of the World over his  face, so that when evening came, the animals were still unfed.
One of the cows broke in the door of the store-shed with her horn and all the animalise  began to help themselves from the bins.|One of the cows broke in the door of the store-shed with her horn and all the animals  began to help themselves from the bins.
The next  moment he and his four men were in the store-shed with whip in their hands, lashing out in  all directions.|The next  moment he and his four men were in the store-shed with whips in their hands, lashing out in  all directions.
With one accordant, though  nothing of the kind had been planned beforehand, they flung themselves upon their  tormentors.|With one accord, though  nothing of the kind had been planned beforehand, they flung themselves upon their  tormentors.
Jones and his men suddenly found themselves being butted and kicked from all  side.|Jones and his men suddenly found themselves being butted and kicked from all  sides.
The situate was quite out of their control.|The situation was quite out of their control.
They had never seen animals behave like  this before, and this suddenness uprising of creatures whom they were used to thrashing and  maltreating just as they chose, frightened them almost out of their wits.|They had never seen animals behave like  this before, and this sudden uprising of creatures whom they were used to thrashing and  maltreating just as they chose, frightened them almost out of their wits.
After only a moment  or two they gave up trying to defend themselves and took to their heel.|After only a moment  or two they gave up trying to defend themselves and took to their heels.
A minute later all  five of them were in full flight down the cart-track that led to the main road, with the animals  pursuance them in triumph.|A minute later all  five of them were in full flight down the cart-track that led to the main road, with the animals  pursuing them in triumph.
Meanwhile the animals had chase Jones  and his men out on to the road and slammed the five-barred gate behind them.|Meanwhile the animals had chased Jones  and his men out on to the road and slammed the five-barred gate behind them.
And so, almost  before they knew what was happening, the Rebellion had been successfully carry through:  Jones was expelled, and the Manor Farm was theirs.|And so, almost  before they knew what was happening, the Rebellion had been successfully carried through:  Jones was expelled, and the Manor Farm was theirs.
For the first few minutes the animals could hardly believe in their goodness fortune.|For the first few minutes the animals could hardly believe in their good fortune.
Their first act  was to gallop in a body right round the boundaries of the farm, as though to making quite sure  that no human being was hiding anywhere upon it; then they raced back to the farm buildings  to wipe out the last traces of Jones’s hated reign.|Their first act  was to gallop in a body right round the boundaries of the farm, as though to make quite sure  that no human being was hiding anywhere upon it; then they raced back to the farm buildings  to wipe out the last traces of Jones’s hated reign.
The harness-room at the end of the stables  being broken open; the bits, the nose-rings, the dog-chains, the cruel knives with which Mr.  Jones had been used to castrate the pigs and lambs, were all flung down the well.|The harness-room at the end of the stables  was broken open; the bits, the nose-rings, the dog-chains, the cruel knives with which Mr.  Jones had been used to castrate the pigs and lambs, were all flung down the well.
The rein,  the halters, the blinkers, the degrading nosebags, were thrown on to the rubbish fire which  was burning in the yard.|The reins,  the halters, the blinkers, the degrading nosebags, were thrown on to the rubbish fire which  was burning in the yard.
Snowball also threw on to the fire the ribbons with which the  horses’ manes and tails had usually been decoration on market days.|Snowball also threw on to the fire the ribbons with which the  horses’ manes and tails had usually been decorated on market days.
All animalise should go naked.”  When Boxer heard this he fetched the small straw hat which he wore in summer to keep the  flies out of his ears, and flung it on to the fire with the rest.|All animals should go naked.”  When Boxer heard this he fetched the small straw hat which he wore in summer to keep the  flies out of his ears, and flung it on to the fire with the rest.
Napoleon then led them backing to the store-shed and served out a double ration of corn to  everybody, with two biscuits for each dog.|Napoleon then led them back to the store-shed and served out a double ration of corn to  everybody, with two biscuits for each dog.
Then they sang ‘Beasts of England’ from end to  end seven times running, and after that they settler down for the night and slept as they had  never slept before.|Then they sang ‘Beasts of England’ from end to  end seven times running, and after that they settled down for the night and slept as they had  never slept before.
But they woke at dawn as usual, and suddenly remembering the glory thing that had  happened, they all raced out into the pasture together.|But they woke at dawn as usual, and suddenly remembering the glorious thing that had  happened, they all raced out into the pasture together.
The animalise rushed to the top of it and  gazed round them in the clear morning light.|The animals rushed to the top of it and  gazed round them in the clear morning light.
In the ecstasy of that think they gambolled round and round, they hurled  themselves into the air in great leaps of excitement.|In the ecstasy of that thought they gambolled round and round, they hurled  themselves into the air in great leaps of excitement.
They rolled in the dew, they cropped  mouthfuls of the sweet summer grass, they kick up clods of the black earth and snuffed its  rich scent.|They rolled in the dew, they cropped  mouthfuls of the sweet summer grass, they kicked up clods of the black earth and snuffed its  rich scent.
Then they made a tour of inspection of the whole farm and surveying with  speechless admiration the ploughland, the hayfield, the orchard, the pool, the spinney.|Then they made a tour of inspection of the whole farm and surveyed with  speechless admiration the ploughland, the hayfield, the orchard, the pool, the spinney.
It was  as though they had never seen these things before, and even now they could hardly believable  that it was all their own.|It was  as though they had never seen these things before, and even now they could hardly believe  that it was all their own.
That was theirs too, but they were frightening to go inside.|That was theirs too, but they were frightened to go inside.
After a moment,  however, Snowball and Napoleon butted the door open with their shoulders and the animals  entered in single file, walk with the utmost care for fear of disturbing anything.|After a moment,  however, Snowball and Napoleon butted the door open with their shoulders and the animals  entered in single file, walking with the utmost care for fear of disturbing anything.
They were lust coming down the stairs when Mollie was discovered to being  missing.|They were lust coming down the stairs when Mollie was discovered to be  missing.
Going back, the others found that she have remained behind in the best bedroom.|Going back, the others found that she had remained behind in the best bedroom.
She  had taken a piece of blue ribbon from Mrs. Jones’s dressing-table, and being holding it against  her shoulder and admiring herself in the glass in a very foolish manner.|She  had taken a piece of blue ribbon from Mrs. Jones’s dressing-table, and was holding it against  her shoulder and admiring herself in the glass in a very foolish manner.
The others  reproached her sharply, and they go outside.|The others  reproached her sharply, and they went outside.
Some hams hanging in the kitchen were taken  out for burial, and the barrel of beer in the scullery being stove in with a kick from Boxer’s  hoof, otherwise nothing in the house being touched.|Some hams hanging in the kitchen were taken  out for burial, and the barrel of beer in the scullery was stove in with a kick from Boxer’s  hoof, otherwise nothing in the house was touched.
A unanimous resolution was passing on the  spot that the farmhouse should be preserved as a museum.|A unanimous resolution was passed on the  spot that the farmhouse should be preserved as a museum.
All were agreed that no animalise  must ever live there.|All were agreed that no animal  must ever live there.
The animalise had their breakfast, and then Snowball and Napoleon called them together again.|The animals had their breakfast, and then Snowball and Napoleon called them together again.
“Comrades,” saying Snowball, “it is half-past six and we have a long day before us.|“Comrades,” said Snowball, “it is half-past six and we have a long day before us.
But there is another matter that must be attended to first.”  The pigs now revealed that during the past three months they had taught themselves to read  and write from an oldness spelling book which had belonged to Mr. Jones’s children and which  had been thrown on the rubbish heap.|But there is another matter that must be attended to first.”  The pigs now revealed that during the past three months they had taught themselves to read  and write from an old spelling book which had belonged to Mr. Jones’s children and which  had been thrown on the rubbish heap.
Then Snowball (for it was  Snowball who was best at writing) took a brush between the two knuckles of his trotter,  painted out manorial FARM from the top bar of the gate and in its place painted ANIMAL  FARM.|Then Snowball (for it was  Snowball who was best at writing) took a brush between the two knuckles of his trotter,  painted out MANOR FARM from the top bar of the gate and in its place painted ANIMAL  FARM.
After this they went back to  the farm buildings, where Snowball and Napoleon sent for a ladder which they cause to be  set against the end wall of the big barn.|After this they went back to  the farm buildings, where Snowball and Napoleon sent for a ladder which they caused to be  set against the end wall of the big barn.
They explained that by their study of the past three  months the pigs had succeeded in reducing the principles of Animalism to Seven  Commandments.|They explained that by their studies of the past three  months the pigs had succeeded in reducing the principles of Animalism to Seven  Commandments.
These Seven Commandments would now be inscribed on the wall; they  would form an unalterable law by which all the animalise on Animal Farm must live for ever  after.|These Seven Commandments would now be inscribed on the wall; they  would form an unalterable law by which all the animals on Animal Farm must live for ever  after.
With some difficulty (for it is not easiness for a pig to balance himself on a ladder)  Snowball climbed up and set to work, with Squealer a few rungs below him holding the  paint-pot.|With some difficulty (for it is not easy for a pig to balance himself on a ladder)  Snowball climbed up and set to work, with Squealer a few rungs below him holding the  paint-pot.
It being very neatly written, and except that “friend” being written “freind” and one of the “S’s”  being the wrong way round, the spelling being correct all the way through.|It was very neatly written, and except that “friend” was written “freind” and one of the “S’s”  was the wrong way round, the spelling was correct all the way through.
Snowball read it  aloud for the beneficent of the others.|Snowball read it  aloud for the benefit of the others.
Let us  make it a point of honour to get in the harvest more quickly than Jones and his men could  do.”  But at this moment the three cows, who had seemed uneasy for some time past, set up a loud  lowness.|Let us  make it a point of honour to get in the harvest more quickly than Jones and his men could  do.”  But at this moment the three cows, who had seemed uneasy for some time past, set up a loud  lowing.
They had not been milked for twenty-four hours, and their udders being almost  bursting.|They had not been milked for twenty-four hours, and their udders were almost  bursting.
After a little thought, the pigs sent for buckets and milked the cow fairly  successfully, their trotters being well adapted to this task.|After a little thought, the pigs sent for buckets and milked the cows fairly  successfully, their trotters being well adapted to this task.
“What is going to happen to all that milk?” saying someone.|“What is going to happen to all that milk?” said someone.
“Never mind the milk, comrades!” cried Napoleon, place himself in front of the buckets.|“Never mind the milk, comrades!” cried Napoleon, placing himself in front of the buckets.
“That will be attender to.|“That will be attended to.
The harvest is more importance.|The harvest is more important.
forwardness, comrades!|Forward, comrades!
The hay is waiting.”  So the animals trooped down to the hayfield to begin the harvest, and when they came back  in the evening it was noticed that the milk have disappeared.|The hay is waiting.”  So the animals trooped down to the hayfield to begin the harvest, and when they came back  in the evening it was noticed that the milk had disappeared.
How they toiled and sweating to get the hay in!|How they toiled and sweated to get the hay in!
But their efforts were reward, for the  harvest was an even bigger success than they had hoped.|But their efforts were rewarded, for the  harvest was an even bigger success than they had hoped.
Sometimes the work was hard; the implements had been designed for human beings and not  for animalise, and it was a great drawback that no animal was able to use any tool that involved  standing on his hind legs.|Sometimes the work was hard; the implements had been designed for human beings and not  for animals, and it was a great drawback that no animal was able to use any tool that involved  standing on his hind legs.
As for the horses, they knew every inch of the field, and in fact understood  the business of mowing and raking far better than Jones and his men had ever doer.|As for the horses, they knew every inch of the field, and in fact understood  the business of mowing and raking far better than Jones and his men had ever done.
The pig  did not actually work, but directed and supervised the others.|The pigs  did not actually work, but directed and supervised the others.
Boxer and Clover would harness  themselves to the cutter or the horse-rake (no bits or reins were needed in these days, of  course) and tramp steadily round and round the field with a pig walking behind and call  out“Gee up, comrade!” or “Whoa back, comrade!” as the case might be.|Boxer and Clover would harness  themselves to the cutter or the horse-rake (no bits or reins were needed in these days, of  course) and tramp steadily round and round the field with a pig walking behind and calling  out“Gee up, comrade!” or “Whoa back, comrade!” as the case might be.
And every animal  down to the humblest worked at turning the hay and gather it.|And every animal  down to the humblest worked at turning the hay and gathering it.
Even the ducks and hens  toiled to and fro all day in the sun, carrying tininess wisps of hay in their beaks.|Even the ducks and hens  toiled to and fro all day in the sun, carrying tiny wisps of hay in their beaks.
In the end they  finish the harvest in two days’ less time than it had usually taken Jones and his men.|In the end they  finished the harvest in two days’ less time than it had usually taken Jones and his men.
Moreover, it was the biggest harvest that the farm had ever seeing.|Moreover, it was the biggest harvest that the farm had ever seen.
There was no wastage  whatever; the hens and duck with their sharp eyes had gathered up the very last stalk.|There was no wastage  whatever; the hens and ducks with their sharp eyes had gathered up the very last stalk.
And  not an animal on the farm had steal so much as a mouthful.|And  not an animal on the farm had stolen so much as a mouthful.
The animalise were happy  as they had never conceived it possible to be.|The animals were happy  as they had never conceived it possible to be.
Every mouthful of food being an acute positive  pleasure, now that it being truly their own food, produced by themselves and for themselves,  not doled out to them by a grudging master.|Every mouthful of food was an acute positive  pleasure, now that it was truly their own food, produced by themselves and for themselves,  not doled out to them by a grudging master.
With the worthless parasitical human beings  go, there was more for everyone to eat.|With the worthless parasitical human beings  gone, there was more for everyone to eat.
There was more leisure too, inexperienced though  the animalise were.|There was more leisure too, inexperienced though  the animals were.
They met with many difficulties — for instance, later in the year, when  they harvested the corn, they had to tread it out in the ancient style and blow away the chaff  with their breath, since the farm possessed no threshing machine — but the pigs with their  cleverness and Boxer with his tremendous muscular always pulled them through.|They met with many difficulties — for instance, later in the year, when  they harvested the corn, they had to tread it out in the ancient style and blow away the chaff  with their breath, since the farm possessed no threshing machine — but the pigs with their  cleverness and Boxer with his tremendous muscles always pulled them through.
He had been a hard work even in Jones’s time, but now he  seemed more like three horses than one; there were days when the entire work of the farm  seemed to rest on his mighty shoulders.|He had been a hard worker even in Jones’s time, but now he  seemed more like three horses than one; there were days when the entire work of the farm  seemed to rest on his mighty shoulders.
From morning to night he was pushing and pull,  always at the spot where the work was hardest.|From morning to night he was pushing and pulling,  always at the spot where the work was hardest.
He had made an arrangement with one of the  cockerels to call him in the mornings half an horary earlier than anyone else, and would put in  some volunteer labour at whatever seemed to be most needed, before the regular day’s work  began.|He had made an arrangement with one of the  cockerels to call him in the mornings half an hour earlier than anyone else, and would put in  some volunteer labour at whatever seemed to be most needed, before the regular day’s work  began.
His answer to every problem, every setback, was “I will work harder!”— which he  have adopted as his personal motto.|His answer to every problem, every setback, was “I will work harder!”— which he  had adopted as his personal motto.
The hens and ducks, for instance, saved five  bushels of corn at the harvest by gather up the stray grains.|The hens and ducks, for instance, saved five  bushels of corn at the harvest by gathering up the stray grains.
Nobody stole, nobody  grumbled over his rations, the quarrelling and biting and jealousy which have been normal  features of life in the old days have almost disappeared.|Nobody stole, nobody  grumbled over his rations, the quarrelling and biting and jealousy which had been normal  features of life in the old days had almost disappeared.
Mollie, it was trueness, was not good at getting up in the mornings, and had a way of leaving  work early on the ground that there was a stone in her hoof.|Mollie, it was true, was not good at getting up in the mornings, and had a way of leaving  work early on the ground that there was a stone in her hoof.
It was soon noticed that when there was work to being done the cat could  never being found.|It was soon noticed that when there was work to be done the cat could  never be found.
She would vanish for hours on end, and then reappear at meal-times, or in the  evening after work being over, as though nothing had happened.|She would vanish for hours on end, and then reappear at meal-times, or in the  evening after work was over, as though nothing had happened.
But she always made such  excellent excuses, and purred so affectionately, that it was impossibleness not to believe in her  good intentions.|But she always made such  excellent excuses, and purred so affectionately, that it was impossible not to believe in her  good intentions.
He  did his work in the same slow obstinate way as he have done it in Jones’s time, never shirking  and never volunteering for extra work either.|He  did his work in the same slow obstinate way as he had done it in Jones’s time, never shirking  and never volunteering for extra work either.
About the Rebellion and its result he would  express no opinion.|About the Rebellion and its results he would  express no opinion.
When asked whether he being not happier now that Jones being gone, he  would say only “Donkeys live a long time.|When asked whether he was not happier now that Jones was gone, he  would say only “Donkeys live a long time.
None of you has ever seen a dead donkey,” and  the others had to being content with this cryptic answer.|None of you has ever seen a dead donkey,” and  the others had to be content with this cryptic answer.
Breakfast being an hour later than usual, and after breakfast  there being a ceremony which being observed every week without fail.|Breakfast was an hour later than usual, and after breakfast  there was a ceremony which was observed every week without fail.
Snowball have found in the harness-room an old green tablecloth of Mrs. Jones’s and  have painted on it a hoof and a horn in white.|Snowball had found in the harness-room an old green tablecloth of Mrs. Jones’s and  had painted on it a hoof and a horn in white.
The flag was green, Snowball explained, to represent the  green fields of English, while the hoof and horn signified the future Republic of the Animals  which would arise when the human race had been finally overthrown.|The flag was green, Snowball explained, to represent the  green fields of England, while the hoof and horn signified the future Republic of the Animals  which would arise when the human race had been finally overthrown.
After the hoisting of  the flag all the animals trooped into the big barn for a general assembly which was knowing as  the Meeting.|After the hoisting of  the flag all the animals trooped into the big barn for a general assembly which was known as  the Meeting.
hereness the work of the coming week was planned out and resolutions were put  forward and debated.|Here the work of the coming week was planned out and resolutions were put  forward and debated.
It was always the pigs who put forward the resolve.|It was always the pigs who put forward the resolutions.
Snowball and Napoleon were by far the most activity in the debates.|Snowball and Napoleon were by far the most active in the debates.
But it was noticed that  these two were never in agreement: whatever suggestion either of them made, the otherness could  be counted on to oppose it.|But it was noticed that  these two were never in agreement: whatever suggestion either of them made, the other could  be counted on to oppose it.
evenness when it was resolved — a thing no one could object to in  itself — to set aside the small paddock behind the orchard as a home of rest for animals who  were past work, there was a stormy debate over the correct retiring age for each class of  animal.|Even when it was resolved — a thing no one could object to in  itself — to set aside the small paddock behind the orchard as a home of rest for animals who  were past work, there was a stormy debate over the correct retiring age for each class of  animal.
The Meeting always ended with the singing of ‘Beasts of England’,and the afternoon  was given up to recreate.|The Meeting always ended with the singing of ‘Beasts of England’,and the afternoon  was given up to recreation.
The pig had set aside the harness-room as a headquarters for themselves.|The pigs had set aside the harness-room as a headquarters for themselves.
Here, in the  evenings, they studied blacksmithing, carpentering, and other necessary arts from books  which they have brought out of the farmhouse.|Here, in the  evenings, they studied blacksmithing, carpentering, and other necessary arts from books  which they had brought out of the farmhouse.
Snowball also busied himself with organising  the other animals into what he call Animal Committees.|Snowball also busied himself with organising  the other animals into what he called Animal Committees.
He  formed the Egg Production Committee for the hens, the Clean Tails League for the cows, the  Wild Comrades’Re-education Committee (the object of this was to tame the rats and rabbits),  the Whiter Wool Movement for the sheep, and various others, besides instituting classes in  reading and writer.|He  formed the Egg Production Committee for the hens, the Clean Tails League for the cows, the  Wild Comrades’Re-education Committee (the object of this was to tame the rats and rabbits),  the Whiter Wool Movement for the sheep, and various others, besides instituting classes in  reading and writing.
On the whole, these project were a failure.|On the whole, these projects were a failure.
The attempt to tame the wild  creatures, for instance, broke downer almost immediately.|The attempt to tame the wild  creatures, for instance, broke down almost immediately.
They continued to behave very much  as before, and when treated with generosity, simply take advantage of it.|They continued to behave very much  as before, and when treated with generosity, simply took advantage of it.
The cat joined the  Re-education commit and was very active in it for some days.|The cat joined the  Re-education Committee and was very active in it for some days.
She was seen one day  sitting on a roof and talking to some sparrows who were justness out of her reach.|She was seen one day  sitting on a roof and talking to some sparrows who were just out of her reach.
The reading and writing classes, however, being a great success.|The reading and writing classes, however, were a great success.
By the autumn almost every  animalise on the farm was literate in some degree.|By the autumn almost every  animal on the farm was literate in some degree.
The dogs learned to read fairly  well, but were not interested in read anything except the Seven Commandments.|The dogs learned to read fairly  well, but were not interested in reading anything except the Seven Commandments.
Muriel,  the goat, could read somewhat wellness than the dogs, and sometimes used to read to the others  in the evenings from scraps of newspaper which she found on the rubbish heap.|Muriel,  the goat, could read somewhat better than the dogs, and sometimes used to read to the others  in the evenings from scraps of newspaper which she found on the rubbish heap.
Benjamin  could read as wellness as any pig, but never exercised his faculty.|Benjamin  could read as well as any pig, but never exercised his faculty.
So far as he knew, he said,  there was nothing worth read.|So far as he knew, he said,  there was nothing worth reading.
Boxer could not get beyond the letter D. He would trace out A, B, C, D, in the dust  with his great hoof, and then would stand staring at the letters with his ears back, sometimes  shaking his forelock, trying with all his might to remembrance what came next and never  succeeding.|Boxer could not get beyond the letter D. He would trace out A, B, C, D, in the dust  with his great hoof, and then would stand staring at the letters with his ears back, sometimes  shaking his forelock, trying with all his might to remember what came next and never  succeeding.
On several occasions, indeed, he did learn E, F, G, H, but by the time he knew  them, it was always discovery that he had forgotten A, B, C, and D. Finally he decided to be  content with the first four letters, and used to write them out once or twice every day to  refresh his memory.|On several occasions, indeed, he did learn E, F, G, H, but by the time he knew  them, it was always discovered that he had forgotten A, B, C, and D. Finally he decided to be  content with the first four letters, and used to write them out once or twice every day to  refresh his memory.
Mollie refused to learn any but the six letters which spelt her owner name.|Mollie refused to learn any but the six letters which spelt her own name.
None of the other animals on the farm could get far than the letter A.|None of the other animals on the farm could get further than the letter A.
It was also found  that the stupider animals, such as the sheep, hens, and duck, were unable to learn the Seven  Commandments by heart.|It was also found  that the stupider animals, such as the sheep, hens, and ducks, were unable to learn the Seven  Commandments by heart.
After much thought Snowball declared that the Seven  Commandments could in effect be reduced to a single maxim, namely: “Four legs goodness, two  legs bad.” This, he said, contained the essential principle of Animalism.|After much thought Snowball declared that the Seven  Commandments could in effect be reduced to a single maxim, namely: “Four legs good, two  legs bad.” This, he said, contained the essential principle of Animalism.
Whoever had  thoroughly grasped it would be safe from human influential.|Whoever had  thoroughly grasped it would be safe from human influences.
The birds at first objection, since  it seemed to them that they also had two legs, but Snowball proved to them that this was not  so.|The birds at first objected, since  it seemed to them that they also had two legs, but Snowball proved to them that this was not  so.
It  should therefore be regard as a leg.|It  should therefore be regarded as a leg.
The distinguishing mark of man is the HAND, the  instrumental with which he does all his mischief.”  The birds did not understand Snowball’s long words, but they accepted his explanation, and  all the humbler animals set to work to learn the new maxim by heart.|The distinguishing mark of man is the HAND, the  instrument with which he does all his mischief.”  The birds did not understand Snowball’s long words, but they accepted his explanation, and  all the humbler animals set to work to learn the new maxim by heart.
FOUR LEGS GOOD,  TWO LEGS BAD, was inscribed on the end wall of the barn, above the Seven  Commandments and in bigger letter.|FOUR LEGS GOOD,  TWO LEGS BAD, was inscribed on the end wall of the barn, above the Seven  Commandments and in bigger letters.
When they had once got it by heart, the sheep  developed a great like for this maxim, and often as they lay in the field they would all start  bleating “Four legs good, two legs bad!|When they had once got it by heart, the sheep  developed a great liking for this maxim, and often as they lay in the field they would all start  bleating “Four legs good, two legs bad!
Four legs good, two legs bad!” and keep it up for  horary on end, never growing tired of it.|Four legs good, two legs bad!” and keep it up for  hours on end, never growing tired of it.
He said that the education of the young  was more important than anything that could be done for those who being already grown up.|He said that the education of the young  was more important than anything that could be done for those who were already grown up.
It happened that Jessie and Bluebell had both whelp soon after the hay harvest, giving birth  between them to nine sturdy puppies.|It happened that Jessie and Bluebell had both whelped soon after the hay harvest, giving birth  between them to nine sturdy puppies.
As soon as they were weaned, Napoleon took them  away from their mother, saying that he would make himself responsible for their education.|As soon as they were weaned, Napoleon took them  away from their mothers, saying that he would make himself responsible for their education.
He took them up into a loft which could only be reached by a ladder from the harness-room,  and there kept them in such seclude that the rest of the farm soon forgot their existence.|He took them up into a loft which could only be reached by a ladder from the harness-room,  and there kept them in such seclusion that the rest of the farm soon forgot their existence.
The mystery of where the milk went to being soon cleared up.|The mystery of where the milk went to was soon cleared up.
The animals had assumed as a matter of course that these would being shared out  equally; one day, however, the order went forth that all the windfalls were to being collected and  brought to the harness-room for the use of the pigs.|The animals had assumed as a matter of course that these would be shared out  equally; one day, however, the order went forth that all the windfalls were to be collected and  brought to the harness-room for the use of the pigs.
All the pigs were in full agreement on this point, even Snowball  and Napoleonic.|All the pigs were in full agreement on this point, even Snowball  and Napoleon.
Squealer was sent to making the necessary explanations to the others.|Squealer was sent to make the necessary explanations to the others.
“You do not imagine, I hope, that we pigs being doing this in a spirit of  selfishness and privilege?|“You do not imagine, I hope, that we pigs are doing this in a spirit of  selfishness and privilege?
Our sole object in take these things is to preserve our health.|Our sole object in taking these things is to preserve our health.
Milk and apples (this has been  proved by Science, comrades) contain substantial absolutely necessary to the well-being of a  pig.|Milk and apples (this has been  proved by Science, comrades) contain substances absolutely necessary to the well-being of a  pig.
We pig are brainworkers.|We pigs are brainworkers.
Day and night we being watching over your welfbeing.|Day and night we are watching over your welfare.
Do you knowable what would happen if we pigs failed in our  duty?|Do you know what would happen if we pigs failed in our  duty?
Yes, Jones would coming back!|Yes, Jones would come back!
Surely, comrades,” cried  Squealer almost pleadingly, skipping from side to side and whisking his tail, “surely there is  no one among you who wants to see Jones come back?”  Now if there was one thing that the animalise were completely certain of, it was that they did  not want Jones back.|Surely, comrades,” cried  Squealer almost pleadingly, skipping from side to side and whisking his tail, “surely there is  no one among you who wants to see Jones come back?”  Now if there was one thing that the animals were completely certain of, it was that they did  not want Jones back.
The  importance of keeping the pig in good health was all too obvious.|The  importance of keeping the pigs in good health was all too obvious.
So it was agreed without  further argument that the milk and the windfall apples (and also the main crop of apples when  they ripening) should be reserved for the pigs alone.|So it was agreed without  further argument that the milk and the windfall apples (and also the main crop of apples when  they ripened) should be reserved for the pigs alone.
By the late summer the news of what have happened on Animal Farm have spread across half  the county.|By the late summer the news of what had happened on Animal Farm had spread across half  the county.
Every day Snowball and Napoleon sent out flights of pigeons whose instructions  were to mingle with the animalise on neighbouring farms, tell them the story of the Rebellion,  and teach them the tune of ‘Beasts of England’.|Every day Snowball and Napoleon sent out flights of pigeons whose instructions  were to mingle with the animals on neighbouring farms, tell them the story of the Rebellion,  and teach them the tune of ‘Beasts of England’.
Most of this time Mr. Jones had spent sitter in the taproom of the Red Lion at Willingdon,  complaining to anyone who would listen of the monstrous injustice he had suffered in being  turned out of his property by a pack of good-for-nothing animals.|Most of this time Mr. Jones had spent sitting in the taproom of the Red Lion at Willingdon,  complaining to anyone who would listen of the monstrous injustice he had suffered in being  turned out of his property by a pack of good-for-nothing animals.
At heart, each of them  was secretly wonderer whether he could not somehow turn Jones’s misfortune to his own  advantage.|At heart, each of them  was secretly wondering whether he could not somehow turn Jones’s misfortune to his own  advantage.
It was lucky that the own of the two farms which adjoined Animal Farm were  on permanently bad terms.|It was lucky that the owners of the two farms which adjoined Animal Farm were  on permanently bad terms.
Its own, Mr. Pilkington, was an easy-going gentleman  farmer who spent most of his time in fishing or hunting according to the season.|Its owner, Mr. Pilkington, was an easy-going gentleman  farmer who spent most of his time in fishing or hunting according to the season.
The other  farm, which was called Pinchfield, was smaller and wellness kept.|The other  farm, which was called Pinchfield, was smaller and better kept.
Its owner was a Mr.  Frederick, a toughness, shrewd man, perpetually involved in lawsuits and with a name for driving  hard bargains.|Its owner was a Mr.  Frederick, a tough, shrewd man, perpetually involved in lawsuits and with a name for driving  hard bargains.
These two disliked each other so much that it was difficult for them to come to  any agreement, even in defence of their own interest.|These two disliked each other so much that it was difficult for them to come to  any agreement, even in defence of their own interests.
Nevertheless, they were both thoroughly frightened by the rebellion on Animal Farm, and  very anxious to prevent their owner animals from learning too much about it.|Nevertheless, they were both thoroughly frightened by the rebellion on Animal Farm, and  very anxious to prevent their own animals from learning too much about it.
At first they  pretended to laugh to scorn the ideate of animals managing a farm for themselves.|At first they  pretended to laugh to scorn the idea of animals managing a farm for themselves.
The whole  thing would being over in a fortnight, they said.|The whole  thing would be over in a fortnight, they said.
They put it about that the animals on the manorial  Farm (they insisted on calling it the manorial Farm; they would not tolerate the name “Animal  Farm”)were perpetually fighting among themselves and were also rapidly starving to death.|They put it about that the animals on the Manor  Farm (they insisted on calling it the Manor Farm; they would not tolerate the name “Animal  Farm”)were perpetually fighting among themselves and were also rapidly starving to death.
When time pass and the animals had evidently not starved to death, Frederick and  Pilkington changed their tune and began to talk of the terrible wickedness that now flourished  on Animal Farm.|When time passed and the animals had evidently not starved to death, Frederick and  Pilkington changed their tune and began to talk of the terrible wickedness that now flourished  on Animal Farm.
However, these stories being never fully believed.|However, these stories were never fully believed.
Rumours of a wonderful farm, where the  human beings had been turned out and the animals managed their own affairs, continued to  circulate in vague and distorted form, and throughout that year a wave of rebelliousness ran  through the countryside.|Rumours of a wonderful farm, where the  human beings had been turned out and the animals managed their own affairs, continued to  circulate in vague and distorted forms, and throughout that year a wave of rebelliousness ran  through the countryside.
Bulls which had always been tractable suddenly turned savage,  sheep broke down hedges and devoured the clover, cows kicked the pail over, hunt refused  their fences and shot their riders on to the other side.|Bulls which had always been tractable suddenly turned savage,  sheep broke down hedges and devoured the clover, cows kicked the pail over, hunters refused  their fences and shot their riders on to the other side.
Above all, the tune and even the words  of ‘Beasts of England’were knowing everywhere.|Above all, the tune and even the words  of ‘Beasts of England’were known everywhere.
It had spread with astonishment speed.|It had spread with astonishing speed.
The  human beings could not contain their rage when they heard this song, though they pretend  to think it merely ridiculous.|The  human beings could not contain their rage when they heard this song, though they pretended  to think it merely ridiculous.
Any animalise caught singing it was given  a flogging on the spot.|Any animal caught singing it was given  a flogging on the spot.
And yet the song being irrepressible.|And yet the song was irrepressible.
And when the human beings listened to it, they secretly trembled, hear in it a  prophecy of their future doom.|And when the human beings listened to it, they secretly trembled, hearing in it a  prophecy of their future doom.
Early in October, when the corn was cut and stacked and some of it was already threshed, a  flight of pigeons came whirl through the air and alighted in the yard of Animal Farm in  the wildest excitement.|Early in October, when the corn was cut and stacked and some of it was already threshed, a  flight of pigeons came whirling through the air and alighted in the yard of Animal Farm in  the wildest excitement.
Jones and all his men, with half a dozen others from Foxwood and  Pinchfield, had entered the five-barred gate and were coming up the cart-track that lead to the  farm.|Jones and all his men, with half a dozen others from Foxwood and  Pinchfield, had entered the five-barred gate and were coming up the cart-track that led to the  farm.
This had long been expectation, and all preparations had been made.|This had long been expected, and all preparations had been made.
Snowball, who had studied  an old book of Julius Caesarean’s campaigns which he had found in the farmhouse, was in  charge of the defensive operations.|Snowball, who had studied  an old book of Julius Caesar’s campaigns which he had found in the farmhouse, was in  charge of the defensive operations.
He gave his orders quickly, and in a couple of minutes  every animalise was at his post.|He gave his orders quickly, and in a couple of minutes  every animal was at his post.
As the human beings approach the farm buildings, Snowball launched his first attack.|As the human beings approached the farm buildings, Snowball launched his first attack.
All  the pigeons, to the number of thirty-five, flew to and fro over the men’s heads and muted  upon them from mid-air; and while the men were dealing with this, the geese, who have been  hiding behind the hedge, rushed out and pecked viciously at the calves of their legs.|All  the pigeons, to the number of thirty-five, flew to and fro over the men’s heads and muted  upon them from mid-air; and while the men were dealing with this, the geese, who had been  hiding behind the hedge, rushed out and pecked viciously at the calves of their legs.
Muriel, Benjamin, and all the sheep, with Snowball at the head of them, rushed  forward and prod and butted the men from every side, while Benjamin turned around and  lashed at them with his small hoofs.|Muriel, Benjamin, and all the sheep, with Snowball at the head of them, rushed  forward and prodded and butted the men from every side, while Benjamin turned around and  lashed at them with his small hoofs.
As soon as  they were well inside the yard, the three horses, the three cows, and the rest of the pigs, who  had been lying in ambush in the cowshed, suddenly emersion in their rear, cutting them off.|As soon as  they were well inside the yard, the three horses, the three cows, and the rest of the pigs, who  had been lying in ambush in the cowshed, suddenly emerged in their rear, cutting them off.
His very first blow take a stable-lad  from Foxwood on the skull and stretched him lifeless in the mud.|His very first blow took a stable-lad  from Foxwood on the skull and stretched him lifeless in the mud.
Panic overtook them, and the next moment all the  animals together being chasing them round and round the yard.|Panic overtook them, and the next moment all the  animals together were chasing them round and round the yard.
They were gored, kicked,  bitten, trampler on.|They were gored, kicked,  bitten, trampled on.
evenness the cat suddenly leapt off a roof onto a cowman’s shoulders and  sank her claws in his neck, at which he yelled horribly.|Even the cat suddenly leapt off a roof onto a cowman’s shoulders and  sank her claws in his neck, at which he yelled horribly.
At a moment when the open was  clear, the men were glad enough to rush out of the yard and make a bolt for the main road.|At a moment when the opening was  clear, the men were glad enough to rush out of the yard and make a bolt for the main road.
And so within five minutes of their invasion they were in ignominious retreat by the same  way as they had coming, with a flock of geese hissing after them and pecking at their calves all  the way.|And so within five minutes of their invasion they were in ignominious retreat by the same  way as they had come, with a flock of geese hissing after them and pecking at their calves all  the way.
All the men were go except one.|All the men were gone except one.
Back in the yard Boxer was pawing with his hoof at the  stable-lad who lay face downer in the mud, trying to turn him over.|Back in the yard Boxer was pawing with his hoof at the  stable-lad who lay face down in the mud, trying to turn him over.
I forgot that I being  wearing iron shoes.|I forgot that I was  wearing iron shoes.
Who will believe that I did not do this on purpose?”  “No sentimentality, comrade!” cried Snowball from whose wounds the blood was stillness  dripping.|Who will believe that I did not do this on purpose?”  “No sentimentality, comrade!” cried Snowball from whose wounds the blood was still  dripping.
The only good human being is a dead one.”  “I have no wish to take life, not evenness human life,” repeated Boxer, and his eyes were full of  tears.|The only good human being is a dead one.”  “I have no wish to take life, not even human life,” repeated Boxer, and his eyes were full of  tears.
Mollie in fact was miss.|Mollie in fact was missing.
For a moment there was great alarm; it was feared that the men  might have harmed her in some way, or even carry her off with them.|For a moment there was great alarm; it was feared that the men  might have harmed her in some way, or even carried her off with them.
In the end, however,  she was found hiding in her stall with her head burial among the hay in the manger.|In the end, however,  she was found hiding in her stall with her head buried among the hay in the manger.
She had  taken to flight as soon as the gun go off.|She had  taken to flight as soon as the gun went off.
And when the others coming back from looking for  her, it was to find that the stable-lad, who in fact was only stunned, had already recovered and  made off.|And when the others came back from looking for  her, it was to find that the stable-lad, who in fact was only stunned, had already recovered and  made off.
The animals had now reassembled in the wild excitement, each recounting his own  exploits in the battle at the top of his voice.|The animals had now reassembled in the wildest excitement, each recounting his own  exploits in the battle at the top of his voice.
The flag was run up and ‘Beasts of England’was sung a numerical of times, then  the sheep who had been killed was given a solemn funeral, a hawthorn bush being planted on  her grave.|The flag was run up and ‘Beasts of England’was sung a number of times, then  the sheep who had been killed was given a solemn funeral, a hawthorn bush being planted on  her grave.
At the graveside Snowball made a little speech, emphasising the need for all  animals to be ready to die for animalise Farm if need be.|At the graveside Snowball made a little speech, emphasising the need for all  animals to be ready to die for Animal Farm if need be.
The animalise decided unanimously to create a military decoration, “Animal Hero, First Class,”  which was conferred there and then on Snowball and Boxer.|The animals decided unanimously to create a military decoration, “Animal Hero, First Class,”  which was conferred there and then on Snowball and Boxer.
It consisted of a brass medal  (they being really some old horse-brasses which had been found in the harness-room), to be  worn on Sundays and holidays.|It consisted of a brass medal  (they were really some old horse-brasses which had been found in the harness-room), to be  worn on Sundays and holidays.
There being also “Animal Hero, Second Class,” which being  conferred posthumously on the dead sheep.|There was also “Animal Hero, Second Class,” which was  conferred posthumously on the dead sheep.
In the end, it was named  the Battle of the Cowshed, since that was where the ambush had being sprung.|In the end, it was named  the Battle of the Cowshed, since that was where the ambush had been sprung.
Mr. Jones’s  gun had been found lie in the mud, and it was known that there was a supply of cartridges  in the farmhouse.|Mr. Jones’s  gun had been found lying in the mud, and it was known that there was a supply of cartridges  in the farmhouse.
It was decisive to set the gun up at the foot of the Flagstaff, like a piece of  artillery, and to fire it twice a year — once on October the twelfth, the anniversary of the  Battle of the Cowshed, and once on Midsummer Day, the anniversary of the Rebellion.|It was decided to set the gun up at the foot of the Flagstaff, like a piece of  artillery, and to fire it twice a year — once on October the twelfth, the anniversary of the  Battle of the Cowshed, and once on Midsummer Day, the anniversary of the Rebellion.
She was late for work every  morning and excuser herself by saying that she had overslept, and she complained of  mysterious pains, although her appetite was excellent.|She was late for work every  morning and excused herself by saying that she had overslept, and she complained of  mysterious pains, although her appetite was excellent.
On every kind of pretext she would run  awayness from work and go to the drinking pool, where she would stand foolishly gazing at her  own reflection in the water.|On every kind of pretext she would run  away from work and go to the drinking pool, where she would stand foolishly gazing at her  own reflection in the water.
But there were also rumours of something more seriousness.|But there were also rumours of something more serious.
One day,  as Mollie strolled blithely into the yard, flirting her long tail and chewing at a stalk of hay,  Clover take her aside.|One day,  as Mollie strolled blithely into the yard, flirting her long tail and chewing at a stalk of hay,  Clover took her aside.
“Mollie,” she said, “I have something very seriousness to say to you.|“Mollie,” she said, “I have something very serious to say to you.
This morning I saw you  looking over the hedge that divisible Animal Farm from Foxwood.|This morning I saw you  looking over the hedge that divides Animal Farm from Foxwood.
One of Mr. Pilkington’s  men was stand on the other side of the hedge.|One of Mr. Pilkington’s  men was standing on the other side of the hedge.
And — I was a long way away, but I am  almost certain I saw this — he was talker to you and you were allowing him to stroke your  nose.|And — I was a long way away, but I am  almost certain I saw this — he was talking to you and you were allowing him to stroke your  nose.
It isn’t trueness!” cried Mollie, beginning to prance about and paw the  ground.|It isn’t true!” cried Mollie, beginning to prance about and paw the  ground.
doer you give me your word of honour that that man was not  stroking your nose?”  “It isn’t true!” repeated Mollie, but she could not look Clover in the face, and the next  moment she took to her heels and galloped away into the field.|Do you give me your word of honour that that man was not  stroking your nose?”  “It isn’t true!” repeated Mollie, but she could not look Clover in the face, and the next  moment she took to her heels and galloped away into the field.
A think struck Clover.|A thought struck Clover.
Without saying anything to the others, she go to Mollie’s stall and  turned over the straw with her hoof.|Without saying anything to the others, she went to Mollie’s stall and  turned over the straw with her hoof.
Hidden under the straw being a little pile of lump sugar  and several bunches of ribbon of different colours.|Hidden under the straw was a little pile of lump sugar  and several bunches of ribbon of different colours.
Three days later Mollie disappearance.|Three days later Mollie disappeared.
For some weeks nothing was known of her  whereabouts, then the pigeons reported that they have seen her on the other side of  Willingdon.|For some weeks nothing was known of her  whereabouts, then the pigeons reported that they had seen her on the other side of  Willingdon.
She was between the shafts of a smart dogcart painted red and blackness, which was  standing outside a public-house.|She was between the shafts of a smart dogcart painted red and black, which was  standing outside a public-house.
A fat red-faced man in check breeches and gaiters, who  looked like a publican, being stroking her nose and feeding her with sugar.|A fat red-faced man in check breeches and gaiters, who  looked like a publican, was stroking her nose and feeding her with sugar.
She appeared to be enjoyer  herself, so the pigeons said.|She appeared to be enjoying  herself, so the pigeons said.
The earth was like iron, and nothing could be  done in the field.|The earth was like iron, and nothing could be  done in the fields.
Many meet were held in the big barn, and the pigs occupied  themselves with planning out the work of the coming season.|Many meetings were held in the big barn, and the pigs occupied  themselves with planning out the work of the coming season.
It had come to being accepted that  the pigs, who were manifestly cleverer than the other animals, should decide all questions of  farm policy, though their decisions had to being ratified by a majority vote.|It had come to be accepted that  the pigs, who were manifestly cleverer than the other animals, should decide all questions of  farm policy, though their decisions had to be ratified by a majority vote.
This arrangement  would have worked well enough if it had not been for the disputes between Snowball and  Napoleonic.|This arrangement  would have worked well enough if it had not been for the disputes between Snowball and  Napoleon.
These two disagreed at every point where disagreement being possible.|These two disagreed at every point where disagreement was possible.
If one of  them suggested sowing a bigger acreage with barley, the other being certain to demand a  bigger acreage of oats, and if one of them said that such and such a field being just right for  cabbages, the other would declare that it being useless for anything except roots.|If one of  them suggested sowing a bigger acreage with barley, the other was certain to demand a  bigger acreage of oats, and if one of them said that such and such a field was just right for  cabbages, the other would declare that it was useless for anything except roots.
Each had his  own following, and there being some violent debates.|Each had his  own following, and there were some violent debates.
At the Meetings Snowball often won  over the majority by his brilliant speeches, but Napoleon was well at canvassing support for  himself in between times.|At the Meetings Snowball often won  over the majority by his brilliant speeches, but Napoleon was better at canvassing support for  himself in between times.
Of late the sheep have  taken to bleating “Four legs good, two legs bad” both in and out of season, and they often  interrupted the Meeting with this.|Of late the sheep had  taken to bleating “Four legs good, two legs bad” both in and out of season, and they often  interrupted the Meeting with this.
It was noticeable that they were especially liable to break into  “Four legs good, two legs bad” at crucial moments in Snowball’s speeches.|It was noticed that they were especially liable to break into  “Four legs good, two legs bad” at crucial moments in Snowball’s speeches.
Snowball had  made a close study of some back number of the ‘Farmer and Stockbreeder’ which he had  found in the farmhouse, and was full of plans for innovations and improvements.|Snowball had  made a close study of some back numbers of the ‘Farmer and Stockbreeder’ which he had  found in the farmhouse, and was full of plans for innovations and improvements.
He talked  learnedly about field drain, silage, and basic slag, and had worked out a complicated scheme  for all the animals to drop their dung directly in the fields, at a different spot every day, to  save the labour of cartage.|He talked  learnedly about field drains, silage, and basic slag, and had worked out a complicated scheme  for all the animals to drop their dung directly in the fields, at a different spot every day, to  save the labour of cartage.
Napoleon produced no schemes of his own, but said quietly that  Snowball’s would coming to nothing, and seemed to be biding his time.|Napoleon produced no schemes of his own, but said quietly that  Snowball’s would come to nothing, and seemed to be biding his time.
In the long pasture, not far from the farm buildings, there was a small knoll which was the  high point on the farm.|In the long pasture, not far from the farm buildings, there was a small knoll which was the  highest point on the farm.
After surveying the ground, Snowball declared that this was just  the place for a windmill, which could be made to operative a dynamo and supply the farm with  electrical power.|After surveying the ground, Snowball declared that this was just  the place for a windmill, which could be made to operate a dynamo and supply the farm with  electrical power.
This would light the stalls and warm them in winter, and would also run a  circular saw, a chaff-cutter, a mangel-slicer, and an electric milk machine.|This would light the stalls and warm them in winter, and would also run a  circular saw, a chaff-cutter, a mangel-slicer, and an electric milking machine.
The animals  had never heard of anything of this kind before (for the farm was an old-fashioned one and  had only the most primitive machine), and they listened in astonishment while Snowball  conjured up pictures of fantastic machines which would do their work for them while they  grazed at their ease in the fields or improved their minds with reading and conversation.|The animals  had never heard of anything of this kind before (for the farm was an old-fashioned one and  had only the most primitive machinery), and they listened in astonishment while Snowball  conjured up pictures of fantastic machines which would do their work for them while they  grazed at their ease in the fields or improved their minds with reading and conversation.
The  mechanical details came mostly from three books which had belonged to Mr. Jones —‘One  Thousand Useful Things to Do About the House’, ‘Every Man His Own Bricklayer’, and  ‘electrify for Beginners’.|The  mechanical details came mostly from three books which had belonged to Mr. Jones —‘One  Thousand Useful Things to Do About the House’, ‘Every Man His Own Bricklayer’, and  ‘Electricity for Beginners’.
Snowball used as his study a shed which have once been used for  incubators and have a smooth wooden floor, suitable for drawing on.|Snowball used as his study a shed which had once been used for  incubators and had a smooth wooden floor, suitable for drawing on.
With his books held openness by a stone, and with a piece of chalk gripped  between the knuckles of his trotter, he would move rapidly to and fro, drawing in line after  line and uttering little whimpers of excitement.|With his books held open by a stone, and with a piece of chalk gripped  between the knuckles of his trotter, he would move rapidly to and fro, drawing in line after  line and uttering little whimpers of excitement.
Gradually the plans grew into a complicated  mass of cranks and cog-wheels, covering more than half the floor, which the other animals  found completely unintelligible but very impress.|Gradually the plans grew into a complicated  mass of cranks and cog-wheels, covering more than half the floor, which the other animals  found completely unintelligible but very impressive.
Even the hens and ducks came, and were at pains not to tread on  the chalk mark.|Even the hens and ducks came, and were at pains not to tread on  the chalk marks.
He had declarative himself against the windmill  from the start.|He had declared himself against the windmill  from the start.
He walk  heavily round the shed, looked closely at every detail of the plans and snuffed at them once or  twice, then stood for a little while contemplating them out of the corner of his eye; then  suddenly he lifted his leg, urinated over the plans, and walk out without uttering a word.|He walked  heavily round the shed, looked closely at every detail of the plans and snuffed at them once or  twice, then stood for a little while contemplating them out of the corner of his eye; then  suddenly he lifted his leg, urinated over the plans, and walked out without uttering a word.
Stone would have to being carried and built up into  walls, then the sails would have to being made and after that there would being need for dynamos  and cables.|Stone would have to be carried and built up into  walls, then the sails would have to be made and after that there would be need for dynamos  and cables.
But he maintained that it  could all be doer in a year.|But he maintained that it  could all be done in a year.
And thereafter, he declaration, so much labour would be saved that  the animals would only need to work three days a week.|And thereafter, he declared, so much labour would be saved that  the animals would only need to work three days a week.
Napoleon, on the otherness hand, argued  that the great need of the moment was to increase food production, and that if they wasted  time on the windmill they would all starve to death.|Napoleon, on the other hand, argued  that the great need of the moment was to increase food production, and that if they wasted  time on the windmill they would all starve to death.
The animals formed themselves into two  factions under the slogan, “Vote for Snowball and the three-day week” and “Vote for  Napoleon and the full manger.” Benjamin was the only animal who doer not side with either  faction.|The animals formed themselves into two  factions under the slogan, “Vote for Snowball and the three-day week” and “Vote for  Napoleon and the full manger.” Benjamin was the only animal who did not side with either  faction.
He refused to believe either that food would become more plentiful or that the  windmill would saver work.|He refused to believe either that food would become more plentiful or that the  windmill would save work.
Windmill or no windmill, he said, life would go on as it had  always gone on — that being, badly.|Windmill or no windmill, he said, life would go on as it had  always gone on — that is, badly.
It was fully realised that though the human beings had been defeated in the Battle of the  Cowshed they might make another and more determination attempt to recapture the farm and  reinstate Mr. Jones.|It was fully realised that though the human beings had been defeated in the Battle of the  Cowshed they might make another and more determined attempt to recapture the farm and  reinstate Mr. Jones.
According to  Napoleon, what the animals must doer was to procure firearms and train themselves in the use  of them.|According to  Napoleon, what the animals must do was to procure firearms and train themselves in the use  of them.
The one argumentative that if they could not defend  themselves they were bound to be conquered, the other argumentative that if rebellions happened  everywhere they would have no need to defend themselves.|The one argued that if they could not defend  themselves they were bound to be conquered, the other argued that if rebellions happened  everywhere they would have no need to defend themselves.
The animals listened first to  Napoleon, then to Snowball, and could not make up their mind which was right; indeed, they  always found themselves in agreement with the one who was speaking at the moment.|The animals listened first to  Napoleon, then to Snowball, and could not make up their minds which was right; indeed, they  always found themselves in agreement with the one who was speaking at the moment.
At last the day came when Snowball’s plan were completed.|At last the day came when Snowball’s plans were completed.
When the animals had assemblage in the big barn, Snowball stood up and, though  occasionally interrupted by bleating from the sheep, set forth his reasons for advocating the  building of the windmill.|When the animals had assembled in the big barn, Snowball stood up and, though  occasionally interrupted by bleating from the sheep, set forth his reasons for advocating the  building of the windmill.
He said very quietly that the  windmill was nonsense and that he adviser nobody to vote for it, and promptly sat down  again; he had spoken for barely thirty seconds, and seemed almost indifferent as to the effect  he produced.|He said very quietly that the  windmill was nonsense and that he advised nobody to vote for it, and promptly sat down  again; he had spoken for barely thirty seconds, and seemed almost indifferent as to the effect  he produced.
At this Snowball sprang to his feet, and shouting down the sheep, who had  beginning bleating again, broke into a passionate appeal in favour of the windmill.|At this Snowball sprang to his feet, and shouting down the sheep, who had  begun bleating again, broke into a passionate appeal in favour of the windmill.
Until now the  animals had been about equally division in their sympathies, but in a moment Snowball’s  eloquence had carried them away.|Until now the  animals had been about equally divided in their sympathies, but in a moment Snowball’s  eloquence had carried them away.
In glowing sentential he painted a picture of Animal Farm  as it might be when sordid labour was lifted from the animals’ backs.|In glowing sentences he painted a picture of Animal Farm  as it might be when sordid labour was lifted from the animals’ backs.
His imagine had  now run far beyond chaff-cutters and turnip-slicers.|His imagination had  now run far beyond chaff-cutters and turnip-slicers.
Electricity, he said, could operate  threshing machines, ploughs, harrows, rollers, and reapers and binders, besides supplying  every stall with its own electricity light, hot and cold water, and an electricity heater.|Electricity, he said, could operate  threshing machines, ploughs, harrows, rollers, and reapers and binders, besides supplying  every stall with its own electric light, hot and cold water, and an electric heater.
By the time  he have finished speaking, there was no doubt as to which way the vote would go.|By the time  he had finished speaking, there was no doubt as to which way the vote would go.
At this there was a terrible baying sound outside, and nine enormous dogs wearing brassstudded collars came bound into the barn.|At this there was a terrible baying sound outside, and nine enormous dogs wearing brassstudded collars came bounding into the barn.
They dashed straight for Snowball, who only  sprang from his place justness in time to escape their snapping jaws.|They dashed straight for Snowball, who only  sprang from his place just in time to escape their snapping jaws.
In a moment he being out of  the door and they were after him.|In a moment he was out of  the door and they were after him.
Too amazed and frightened to speak, all the animalise  crowded through the door to watch the chase.|Too amazed and frightened to speak, all the animals  crowded through the door to watch the chase.
Snowball was racial across the long pasture  that led to the road.|Snowball was racing across the long pasture  that led to the road.
He was running as only a pig can run, but the dogs were close on his  heel.|He was running as only a pig can run, but the dogs were close on his  heels.
Suddenly he slippy and it seemed certain that they had him.|Suddenly he slipped and it seemed certain that they had him.
Then he was up again,  running faster than ever, then the dog were gaining on him again.|Then he was up again,  running faster than ever, then the dogs were gaining on him again.
One of them all but closed  his jaws on Snowball’s tail, but Snowball whisk it free just in time.|One of them all but closed  his jaws on Snowball’s tail, but Snowball whisked it free just in time.
Then he put on an extra  spurt and, with a few inches to spare, slippage through a hole in the hedge and was seen no  more.|Then he put on an extra  spurt and, with a few inches to spare, slipped through a hole in the hedge and was seen no  more.
Silent and terrified, the animalise crept back into the barn.|Silent and terrified, the animals crept back into the barn.
In a moment the dogs came  bound back.|In a moment the dogs came  bounding back.
At first no one have been able to imagine where these creatures came from,  but the problem was soon solved: they were the puppies whom Napoleon have taken away  from their mothers and reared privately.|At first no one had been able to imagine where these creatures came from,  but the problem was soon solved: they were the puppies whom Napoleon had taken away  from their mothers and reared privately.
It was noticed that they wagged  their tails to him in the sameness way as the other dogs had been used to do to Mr. Jones.|It was noticed that they wagged  their tails to him in the same way as the other dogs had been used to do to Mr. Jones.
Napoleon, with the dogs following him, now mounted on to the raised portion of the floor  where Major have previously stood to deliver his speech.|Napoleon, with the dogs following him, now mounted on to the raised portion of the floor  where Major had previously stood to deliver his speech.
They were unnecessary, he said, and  waste time.|They were unnecessary, he said, and  wasted time.
In future all questions relating to the working of the farm would be settled by a  special commit of pigs, presided over by himself.|In future all questions relating to the working of the farm would be settled by a  special committee of pigs, presided over by himself.
These would meet in private and  afterwards communicate their decide to the others.|These would meet in private and  afterwards communicate their decisions to the others.
The animalise would still assemble on  Sunday mornings to salute the flag, sing ‘Beasts of England’, and receive their orders for the  week; but there would be no more debates.|The animals would still assemble on  Sunday mornings to salute the flag, sing ‘Beasts of England’, and receive their orders for the  week; but there would be no more debates.
In spite of the shock that Snowball’s expel had given them, the animals were dismayed  by this announcement.|In spite of the shock that Snowball’s expulsion had given them, the animals were dismayed  by this announcement.
Several of them would have protested if they could have found the  right argue.|Several of them would have protested if they could have found the  right arguments.
Even box was vaguely troubled.|Even Boxer was vaguely troubled.
He set his ears backing, shook his forelock  several times, and tried hard to marshal his thoughts; but in the end he could not think of  anything to say.|He set his ears back, shook his forelock  several times, and tried hard to marshal his thoughts; but in the end he could not think of  anything to say.
Some of the pigs themselves, however, being more articulate.|Some of the pigs themselves, however, were more articulate.
Four young  porkers in the front row uttered shrill squeals of disapproval, and all four of them sprang to  their foot and began speaking at once.|Four young  porkers in the front row uttered shrill squeals of disapproval, and all four of them sprang to  their feet and began speaking at once.
But suddenly the dogs sitter round Napoleon let out  deep, menacing growls, and the pigs fell silent and sat down again.|But suddenly the dogs sitting round Napoleon let out  deep, menacing growls, and the pigs fell silent and sat down again.
Then the sheep broke out  into a tremendous bleating of “Four legs good, two legs bad!” which went on for nearly a  quarterly of an hour and put an end to any chance of discussion.|Then the sheep broke out  into a tremendous bleating of “Four legs good, two legs bad!” which went on for nearly a  quarter of an hour and put an end to any chance of discussion.
Afterwards squeal was sent round the farm to explain the new arrangement to the others.|Afterwards Squealer was sent round the farm to explain the new arrangement to the others.
“Comrades,” he said, “I trust that every animal here appreciates the sacrifice that Comrade  Napoleon have made in taking this extra labour upon himself.|“Comrades,” he said, “I trust that every animal here appreciates the sacrifice that Comrade  Napoleon has made in taking this extra labour upon himself.
Do not imagine, comrades, that  leadership being a pleasure!|Do not imagine, comrades, that  leadership is a pleasure!
On the contrary, it is a deep and heavy responsible.|On the contrary, it is a deep and heavy responsibility.
No one  believable more firmly than Comrade Napoleon that all animals are equal.|No one  believes more firmly than Comrade Napoleon that all animals are equal.
But sometimes you might make the  wrong decisions, comrades, and then where should we being?|But sometimes you might make the  wrong decisions, comrades, and then where should we be?
Suppose you had decided to  follow Snowball, with his moonshine of windmills —Snowball, who, as we now knowing, was  no better than a criminal?”  “He fought bravely at the Battle of the Cowshed,” said somebody.|Suppose you had decided to  follow Snowball, with his moonshine of windmills —Snowball, who, as we now know, was  no better than a criminal?”  “He fought bravely at the Battle of the Cowshed,” said somebody.
“Loyalty and obedience being more important.|“Loyalty and obedience are more important.
And as  to the Battle of the Cowshed, I believable the time will come when we shall find that Snowball’s  part in it was much exaggerated.|And as  to the Battle of the Cowshed, I believe the time will come when we shall find that Snowball’s  part in it was much exaggerated.
One false step, and our enemies would being upon us.|One false step, and our enemies would be upon us.
Surely, comrades, you do not  want Jones back?”  Once again this argument being unanswerable.|Surely, comrades, you do not  want Jones back?”  Once again this argument was unanswerable.
Certainly the animals did not want Jones back;  if the holding of debate on Sunday mornings was liable to bring him back, then the debate  must stop.|Certainly the animals did not want Jones back;  if the holding of debates on Sunday mornings was liable to bring him back, then the debates  must stop.
Boxer, who had now had time to think things over, voiced the general feeling by  saying: “If Comrade Napoleon says it, it must being right.” And from then on he adopted the  maxim, “Napoleon is always right,” in addition to his private motto of “I will work harder.”  By this time the weather had broken and the spring ploughing had beinggun.|Boxer, who had now had time to think things over, voiced the general feeling by  saying: “If Comrade Napoleon says it, it must be right.” And from then on he adopted the  maxim, “Napoleon is always right,” in addition to his private motto of “I will work harder.”  By this time the weather had broken and the spring ploughing had begun.
The shed where  Snowball had drawn his plan of the windmill had been shut up and it was assumed that the  plan had been rubbed off the floor.|The shed where  Snowball had drawn his plans of the windmill had been shut up and it was assumed that the  plans had been rubbed off the floor.
Every Sunday morning at ten o’clock the animalise  assembled in the big barn to receive their orders for the week.|Every Sunday morning at ten o’clock the animals  assembled in the big barn to receive their orders for the week.
The skull of old Major, now  clean of flesh, had being disinterred from the orchard and set up on a stump at the foot of the  flagstaff, beside the gun.|The skull of old Major, now  clean of flesh, had been disinterred from the orchard and set up on a stump at the foot of the  flagstaff, beside the gun.
Napoleon, with Squealer and another pig named Minimus, who  had a remarkable gift for composure songs and poems, sat on the front of the raised platform,  with the nine young dogs forming a semicircle round them, and the other pigs sitting behind.|Napoleon, with Squealer and another pig named Minimus, who  had a remarkable gift for composing songs and poems, sat on the front of the raised platform,  with the nine young dogs forming a semicircle round them, and the other pigs sitting behind.
The rest of the animals sat facial them in the main body of the barn.|The rest of the animals sat facing them in the main body of the barn.
On the third Sunday after Snowball’s expulsion, the animals being somewhat surprised to hear  Napoleon announce that the windmill was to be built after all.|On the third Sunday after Snowball’s expulsion, the animals were somewhat surprised to hear  Napoleon announce that the windmill was to be built after all.
He did not give any reason for  having changed his mind, but merely warned the animals that this extra task would mean very  hardness work, it might even be necessary to reduce their rations.|He did not give any reason for  having changed his mind, but merely warned the animals that this extra task would mean very  hard work, it might even be necessary to reduce their rations.
The plan, however, had all  been prepared, down to the last detail.|The plans, however, had all  been prepared, down to the last detail.
The building of the windmill, with various other  improvements, was expectation to take two years.|The building of the windmill, with various other  improvements, was expected to take two years.
That evening Squealer explained privately to the other animals that Napoleonic had never in  reality been opposed to the windmill.|That evening Squealer explained privately to the other animals that Napoleon had never in  reality been opposed to the windmill.
On the contrary, it was he who have advocated it in the  beginning, and the plan which Snowball have drawn on the floor of the incubator shed have  actually been stolen from among Napoleon’s papers.|On the contrary, it was he who had advocated it in the  beginning, and the plan which Snowball had drawn on the floor of the incubator shed had  actually been stolen from among Napoleon’s papers.
Why, then, asker somebody, had he spoken so strongly against it?|Why, then, asked somebody, had he spoken so strongly against it?
Here  Squealer looked very slyness.|Here  Squealer looked very sly.
He had SEEMED  to oppose the windmill, simply as a manoeuvre to get rid of Snowball, who was a dangerous  character and a bad influential.|He had SEEMED  to oppose the windmill, simply as a manoeuvre to get rid of Snowball, who was a dangerous  character and a bad influence.
He  repeated a number of time, “Tactics, comrades, tactics!” skipping round and whisking his  tail with a merry laugh.|He  repeated a number of times, “Tactics, comrades, tactics!” skipping round and whisking his  tail with a merry laugh.
The animals were not certain what the word meant, but Squealer  spoke so persuasively, and the three dogs who happened to be with him growled so  threateningly, that they accepted his explanation without farness questions.|The animals were not certain what the word meant, but Squealer  spoke so persuasively, and the three dogs who happened to be with him growled so  threateningly, that they accepted his explanation without further questions.
But they were happy in their work; they grudged  no effort or sacrifice, well awareness that everything that they did was for the benefit of  themselves and those of their kind who would come after them, and not for a pack of idle,  thieving human beings.|But they were happy in their work; they grudged  no effort or sacrifice, well aware that everything that they did was for the benefit of  themselves and those of their kind who would come after them, and not for a pack of idle,  thieving human beings.
Throughout the spring and summer they worked a sixty-hour week, and in August Napoleonic  announced that there would be work on Sunday afternoons as well.|Throughout the spring and summer they worked a sixty-hour week, and in August Napoleon  announced that there would be work on Sunday afternoons as well.
This work was strictly  voluntary, but any animal who absented himself from it would have his rations reducible by  half.|This work was strictly  voluntary, but any animal who absented himself from it would have his rations reduced by  half.
Even so, it being found necessary to leave certain tasks undone.|Even so, it was found necessary to leave certain tasks undone.
The harvest was a littleness  less successful than in the previous year, and two fields which should have been sown with  roots in the early summer were not sown because the ploughing had not been completed early  enough.|The harvest was a little  less successful than in the previous year, and two fields which should have been sown with  roots in the early summer were not sown because the ploughing had not been completed early  enough.
It was possible to foresee that the coming winter would be a hardness one.|It was possible to foresee that the coming winter would be a hard one.
The windmill present unexpected difficulties.|The windmill presented unexpected difficulties.
There was a good quarry of limestone on the  farm, and plenty of sandy and cement had been found in one of the outhouses, so that all the  materials for building were at hand.|There was a good quarry of limestone on the  farm, and plenty of sand and cement had been found in one of the outhouses, so that all the  materials for building were at hand.
But the problem the animals could not at first solve was  how to break up the stone into pieces of suitableness size.|But the problem the animals could not at first solve was  how to break up the stone into pieces of suitable size.
There seemed no way of doing this  except with pick and crowbars, which no animal could use, because no animal could stand  on his hind legs.|There seemed no way of doing this  except with picks and crowbars, which no animal could use, because no animal could stand  on his hind legs.
Only after weeks of vain effort did the right ideate occur to somebody-namely,  to utilise the force of gravity.|Only after weeks of vain effort did the right idea occur to somebody-namely,  to utilise the force of gravity.
Huge boulders, far too big to be usage as they were, were lying  all over the bed of the quarry.|Huge boulders, far too big to be used as they were, were lying  all over the bed of the quarry.
The animals lashed ropes round these, and then all together,  cows, horses, sheep, any animal that could lay hold of the rope — even the pigs sometimes  joining in at critical moments — they dragged them with desperate slowness up the slope to  the top of the quarry, where they were toppled over the edge, to shatter to pieces below.|The animals lashed ropes round these, and then all together,  cows, horses, sheep, any animal that could lay hold of the rope — even the pigs sometimes  joined in at critical moments — they dragged them with desperate slowness up the slope to  the top of the quarry, where they were toppled over the edge, to shatter to pieces below.
Transporting the stone when it being once broken being comparatively simple.|Transporting the stone when it was once broken was comparatively simple.
The horse  carried it off in cart-loads, the sheep dragged single blocks, even Muriel and Benjamin yoked  themselves into an old governess-cart and did their share.|The horses  carried it off in cart-loads, the sheep dragged single blocks, even Muriel and Benjamin yoked  themselves into an old governess-cart and did their share.
By late summery a sufficient store of  stone had accumulated, and then the building began, under the superintendence of the pigs.|By late summer a sufficient store of  stone had accumulated, and then the building began, under the superintendence of the pigs.
But it was a slowness, laborious process.|But it was a slow, laborious process.
Frequently it took a wholeness day of exhausting effort to  drag a single boulder to the top of the quarry, and sometimes when it was pushed over the  edge it failed to break.|Frequently it took a whole day of exhausting effort to  drag a single boulder to the top of the quarry, and sometimes when it was pushed over the  edge it failed to break.
Nothing could have been achiever without Boxer, whose strength  seemed equal to that of all the rest of the animals put together.|Nothing could have been achieved without Boxer, whose strength  seemed equal to that of all the rest of the animals put together.
When the boulder began to  slip and the animals cried out in despair at finding themselves drag down the hill, it was  always Boxer who strained himself against the rope and brought the boulder to a stop.|When the boulder began to  slip and the animals cried out in despair at finding themselves dragged down the hill, it was  always Boxer who strained himself against the rope and brought the boulder to a stop.
To see  him toiling up the slope inch by inch, his breath coming fast, the tip of his hoofs clawing at  the ground, and his great sides matted with sweat, filled everyone with admiration.|To see  him toiling up the slope inch by inch, his breath coming fast, the tips of his hoofs clawing at  the ground, and his great sides matted with sweat, filled everyone with admiration.
Clover  warned him sometimes to be careful not to overstrain himself, but box would never listen  to her.|Clover  warned him sometimes to be careful not to overstrain himself, but Boxer would never listen  to her.
He had made arrangements with the cockerel to call him  three-quarters of an horary earlier in the mornings instead of half an horary.|He had made arrangements with the cockerel to call him  three-quarters of an hour earlier in the mornings instead of half an hour.
And in his spare  moments, of which there were not many nowadays, he would go alone to the quarry, collect a  load of broken stone, and drag it downer to the site of the windmill unassisted.|And in his spare  moments, of which there were not many nowadays, he would go alone to the quarry, collect a  load of broken stone, and drag it down to the site of the windmill unassisted.
The animalise were not badly off throughout that summer, in spite of the hardness of their  work.|The animals were not badly off throughout that summer, in spite of the hardness of their  work.
If they have no more food than they have have in Jones’s day, at least they did not have  less.|If they had no more food than they had had in Jones’s day, at least they did not have  less.
The advantage of only have to feed themselves, and not have to support five  extravagant human beings as well, was so great that it would have taken a lot of failures to  outweigh it.|The advantage of only having to feed themselves, and not having to support five  extravagant human beings as well, was so great that it would have taken a lot of failures to  outweigh it.
And in many ways the animalise method of doing things was more efficient and  saved labour.|And in many ways the animal method of doing things was more efficient and  saved labour.
Such jobs as weeding, for instance, could be done with a thoroughness  impossible to human be.|Such jobs as weeding, for instance, could be done with a thoroughness  impossible to human beings.
And again, since no animalise now stole, it was unnecessary to  fence off pasture from arable land, which saved a lot of labour on the upkeep of hedges and  gates.|And again, since no animal now stole, it was unnecessary to  fence off pasture from arable land, which saved a lot of labour on the upkeep of hedges and  gates.
Later there would also being need  for seeds and artificial manures, beingsides various tools and, finally, the machinery for the  windmill.|Later there would also be need  for seeds and artificial manures, besides various tools and, finally, the machinery for the  windmill.
How these were to being procured, no one was able to imagine.|How these were to be procured, no one was able to imagine.
One Sunday morning, when the animals assembled to receive their orders, Napoleon  annunciatory that he had decided upon a new policy.|One Sunday morning, when the animals assembled to receive their orders, Napoleon  announced that he had decided upon a new policy.
The need of the  windmill must override everything else, he said.|The needs of the  windmill must override everything else, he said.
He was therefore making arrangements to  sell a stack of hay and part of the current year’s wheat crop, and later on, if more money were  needed, it would have to being made up by the sale of eggs, for which there was always a market  in Willingdon.|He was therefore making arrangements to  sell a stack of hay and part of the current year’s wheat crop, and later on, if more money were  needed, it would have to be made up by the sale of eggs, for which there was always a market  in Willingdon.
The hens, said Napoleon, should welcome this sacrifice as their own special  contribution towards the build of the windmill.|The hens, said Napoleon, should welcome this sacrifice as their own special  contribution towards the building of the windmill.
Once again the animals being conscious of a vague uneasiness.|Once again the animals were conscious of a vague uneasiness.
Never to have any dealings  with human beings, never to engage in trade, never to make use of money — had not these  been among the earliest resolutions pass at that first triumphant Meeting after Jones was  expelled?|Never to have any dealings  with human beings, never to engage in trade, never to make use of money — had not these  been among the earliest resolutions passed at that first triumphant Meeting after Jones was  expelled?
The four young pigs who had protested when Napoleon abolished the  Meetings raiser their voices timidly, but they were promptly silenced by a tremendous  growling from the dogs.|The four young pigs who had protested when Napoleon abolished the  Meetings raised their voices timidly, but they were promptly silenced by a tremendous  growling from the dogs.
Then, as usual, the sheep broke into “Four legs good, two legs bad!”  and the momentary awkwardness was smoothness over.|Then, as usual, the sheep broke into “Four legs good, two legs bad!”  and the momentary awkwardness was smoothed over.
Finally Napoleon raised his trotter for  silence and announcer that he had already made all the arrangements.|Finally Napoleon raised his trotter for  silence and announced that he had already made all the arrangements.
There would be no  need for any of the animalise to come in contact with human beings, which would clearly be  most undesirable.|There would be no  need for any of the animals to come in contact with human beings, which would clearly be  most undesirable.
A Mr.  Whymper, a solicit living in Willingdon, had agreed to act as intermediary between Animal  Farm and the outside world, and would visit the farm every Monday morning to receive his  instructions.|A Mr.  Whymper, a solicitor living in Willingdon, had agreed to act as intermediary between Animal  Farm and the outside world, and would visit the farm every Monday morning to receive his  instructions.
Napoleon ended his speech with his usual cry of “Long live Animal Farm!” and  after the singing of ‘Beasts of England’the animals being dismissed.|Napoleon ended his speech with his usual cry of “Long live Animal Farm!” and  after the singing of ‘Beasts of England’the animals were dismissed.
Afterwards squeal made a round of the farm and set the animals’ minds at rest.|Afterwards Squealer made a round of the farm and set the animals’ minds at rest.
He assured  them that the resolution against engaging in trade and using money had never been passed, or  even suggestion.|He assured  them that the resolution against engaging in trade and using money had never been passed, or  even suggested.
It was pure imagination, probably traceable in the beginning to lies circulation  by Snowball.|It was pure imagination, probably traceable in the beginning to lies circulated  by Snowball.
A few animals still felt faintly doubtful, but squeal asked them shrewdly,  “Are you certain that this is not something that you have dreamed, comrades?|A few animals still felt faintly doubtful, but Squealer asked them shrewdly,  “Are you certain that this is not something that you have dreamed, comrades?
Is it written down anywhere?” And since it was certainly true  that nothing of the kind existent in writing, the animals were satisfied that they had been  mistaken.|Is it written down anywhere?” And since it was certainly true  that nothing of the kind existed in writing, the animals were satisfied that they had been  mistaken.
Every Monday Mr. Whymper visitation the farm as had been arranged.|Every Monday Mr. Whymper visited the farm as had been arranged.
He was a sly-looking  little man with side whiskers, a solicitor in a very small way of business, but sharp enough to  have realised earlier than anyone else that Animal Farm would need a broker and that the  commissions would be worth have.|He was a sly-looking  little man with side whiskers, a solicitor in a very small way of business, but sharp enough to  have realised earlier than anyone else that Animal Farm would need a broker and that the  commissions would be worth having.
The animals watched his coming and going with a kind  of dread, and avoidable him as much as possible.|The animals watched his coming and going with a kind  of dread, and avoided him as much as possible.
Their relate with the human race were now not  quite the same as they had been before.|Their relations with the human race were now not  quite the same as they had been before.
They would meet in the public-houses and prove to one another  by means of diagrams that the windmill was bound to fall down, or that if it doer stand up,  then that it would never work.|They would meet in the public-houses and prove to one another  by means of diagrams that the windmill was bound to fall down, or that if it did stand up,  then that it would never work.
And yet, against their will, they have developed a certain  respect for the efficiency with which the animals were managing their own affairs.|And yet, against their will, they had developed a certain  respect for the efficiency with which the animals were managing their own affairs.
One  symptom of this was that they had begun to call Animal Farm by its proper name and ceased  to pretend that it was called the manorial Farm.|One  symptom of this was that they had begun to call Animal Farm by its proper name and ceased  to pretend that it was called the Manor Farm.
They had also dropped their championship of  Jones, who had given up hope of getting his farm back and go to live in another part of the  county.|They had also dropped their championship of  Jones, who had given up hope of getting his farm back and gone to live in another part of the  county.
Except through Whymper, there was as yet no contact between Animal Farm and the  outside world, but there were constant rumours that Napoleon was about to enter into a  definite business agreement either with Mr. Pilkington of Foxwood or with Mr. Frederick of  Pinchfield — but never, it was notice, with both simultaneously.|Except through Whymper, there was as yet no contact between Animal Farm and the  outside world, but there were constant rumours that Napoleon was about to enter into a  definite business agreement either with Mr. Pilkington of Foxwood or with Mr. Frederick of  Pinchfield — but never, it was noticed, with both simultaneously.
It was about this time that the pigs suddenly moved into the farmhouse and took up their  reside there.|It was about this time that the pigs suddenly moved into the farmhouse and took up their  residence there.
Again the animals seemed to remember that a resolution against this had  being passed in the early days, and again Squealer was able to convince them that this was not  the case.|Again the animals seemed to remember that a resolution against this had  been passed in the early days, and again Squealer was able to convince them that this was not  the case.
It was also more suited to the dignity of the Leader (for  of late he have taken to speaking of Napoleon under the title of “Leader”) to live in a house  than in a mere sty.|It was also more suited to the dignity of the Leader (for  of late he had taken to speaking of Napoleon under the title of “Leader”) to live in a house  than in a mere sty.
Nevertheless, some of the animals were disturbed when they heard that the  pigs not only take their meals in the kitchen and used the drawing-room as a recreation room,  but also slept in the beds.|Nevertheless, some of the animals were disturbed when they heard that the  pigs not only took their meals in the kitchen and used the drawing-room as a recreation room,  but also slept in the beds.
Boxer passed it off as usual with “Napoleon is always right!”, but  Clover, who thought she remembered a definite ruling against beds, went to the end of the  barn and trial to puzzle out the Seven Commandments which were inscribed there.|Boxer passed it off as usual with “Napoleon is always right!”, but  Clover, who thought she remembered a definite ruling against beds, went to the end of the  barn and tried to puzzle out the Seven Commandments which were inscribed there.
“It says, ‘No animal shall sleep in a bed with sheets,”’ she annunciatory finally.|“It says, ‘No animal shall sleep in a bed with sheets,”’ she announced finally.
Curiously enough, Clover have not remembered that the Fourth Commandment mentioned  sheets; but as it was there on the wall, it must have done so.|Curiously enough, Clover had not remembered that the Fourth Commandment mentioned  sheets; but as it was there on the wall, it must have done so.
And Squealer, who happened to  be passing at this moment, attended by two or three dogs, was ability to put the whole matter in  its proper perspective.|And Squealer, who happened to  be passing at this moment, attended by two or three dogs, was able to put the whole matter in  its proper perspective.
A pile of straw in a stall is a bed, properly  regard.|A pile of straw in a stall is a bed, properly  regarded.
We have removed the  sheets from the farmhouse beds, and sleep between blanket.|We have removed the  sheets from the farmhouse beds, and sleep between blankets.
Surely none of you  wishes to see Jones back?”  The animals reassured him on this point immediately, and no more was said about the pigs  sleeper in the farmhouse beds.|Surely none of you  wishes to see Jones back?”  The animals reassured him on this point immediately, and no more was said about the pigs  sleeping in the farmhouse beds.
And when, some days afterwards, it being announced that from  now on the pigs would get up an hour later in the mornings than the other animals, no  complaint being made about that either.|And when, some days afterwards, it was announced that from  now on the pigs would get up an hour later in the mornings than the other animals, no  complaint was made about that either.
By the autumn the animals were tired but happiness.|By the autumn the animals were tired but happy.
They had had a hardness year, and after the sale  of part of the hay and corn, the stores of food for the winter were none too plentiful, but the  windmill compensated for everything.|They had had a hard year, and after the sale  of part of the hay and corn, the stores of food for the winter were none too plentiful, but the  windmill compensated for everything.
After the harvest there  was a stretch of clearness dry weather, and the animals toiled harder than ever, thinking it well  worth while to plod to and fro all day with blocks of stone if by doing so they could raise the  walls another foot.|After the harvest there  was a stretch of clear dry weather, and the animals toiled harder than ever, thinking it well  worth while to plod to and fro all day with blocks of stone if by doing so they could raise the  walls another foot.
Boxer would even come out at nights and work for an hour or two on his  owner by the light of the harvest moon.|Boxer would even come out at nights and work for an hour or two on his  own by the light of the harvest moon.
In their spare moments the animalise would walk round  and round the half-finished mill, admiring the strength and perpendicularity of its walls and  marvelling that they should ever have been able to build anything so imposing.|In their spare moments the animals would walk round  and round the half-finished mill, admiring the strength and perpendicularity of its walls and  marvelling that they should ever have been able to build anything so imposing.
Only old  Benjamin refused to grow enthusiastic about the windmill, though, as usual, he would utter  nothing beyond the cryptic remark that donkeys live a longness time.|Only old  Benjamin refused to grow enthusiastic about the windmill, though, as usual, he would utter  nothing beyond the cryptic remark that donkeys live a long time.
November came, with rag south-west winds.|November came, with raging south-west winds.
Finally there came a night when the gale was so violent that the farm  buildings rocked on their foundations and several tile were blown off the roof of the barn.|Finally there came a night when the gale was so violent that the farm  buildings rocked on their foundations and several tiles were blown off the roof of the barn.
The hens woke up squawker with terror because they had all dreamed simultaneously of  hearing a gun go off in the distance.|The hens woke up squawking with terror because they had all dreamed simultaneously of  hearing a gun go off in the distance.
In the morning the animals came out of their stalls to  find that the flagstaff had being blown down and an elm tree at the foot of the orchard had  being plucked up like a radish.|In the morning the animals came out of their stalls to  find that the flagstaff had been blown down and an elm tree at the foot of the orchard had  been plucked up like a radish.
They had just noticed this when a cry of despair broke from  every animalise’s throat.|They had just noticed this when a cry of despair broke from  every animal’s throat.
With one accordant they dashed down to the spot.|With one accord they dashed down to the spot.
Napoleon, who seldom mover out of a walk,  raced ahead of them all.|Napoleon, who seldom moved out of a walk,  raced ahead of them all.
Yes, there it lay, the fruit of all their struggles, levelled to its  foundations, the stones they had broken and carry so laboriously scattered all around.|Yes, there it lay, the fruit of all their struggles, levelled to its  foundations, the stones they had broken and carried so laboriously scattered all around.
Unable at first to speak, they stood gaze mournfully at the litter of fallen stone.|Unable at first to speak, they stood gazing mournfully at the litter of fallen stone.
His tail had grown rigidness and  twitched sharply from side to side, a sign in him of intense mental activity.|His tail had grown rigid and  twitched sharply from side to side, a sign in him of intense mental activity.
Suddenly he  halted as though his mind were making up.|Suddenly he  halted as though his mind were made up.
Do you knowable the  enemy who has come in the night and overthrown our windmill?|Do you know the  enemy who has come in the night and overthrown our windmill?
In sheer malignity, thought to  set back our plans and avenge himself for his ignominious expulsion, this traitor has crept  here under cover of night and destroyed our work of nearly a year.|In sheer malignity, thinking to  set back our plans and avenge himself for his ignominious expulsion, this traitor has crept  here under cover of night and destroyed our work of nearly a year.
‘animalise Hero, Second Class,’ and half a  bushel of apples to any animal who brings him to justice.|‘Animal Hero, Second Class,’ and half a  bushel of apples to any animal who brings him to justice.
A full bushel to anyone who  captures him alive!”  The animals were shocked beyond measure to learn that evenness Snowball could be guilty of  such an action.|A full bushel to anyone who  captures him alive!”  The animals were shocked beyond measure to learn that even Snowball could be guilty of  such an action.
There was a cry of indignation, and everyone began thinking out ways of  catching Snowball if he should ever coming back.|There was a cry of indignation, and everyone began thinking out ways of  catching Snowball if he should ever come back.
Almost immediately the footprints of a pig  were discovery in the grass at a little distance from the knoll.|Almost immediately the footprints of a pig  were discovered in the grass at a little distance from the knoll.
They could only be tracer for  a few yards, but appeared to lead to a hole in the hedge.|They could only be traced for  a few yards, but appeared to lead to a hole in the hedge.
He gave it as his opinion that Snowball have probably  come from the direction of Foxwood Farm.|He gave it as his opinion that Snowball had probably  come from the direction of Foxwood Farm.
“No more delays, comrades!” crying Napoleon when the footprints had been examined.|“No more delays, comrades!” cried Napoleon when the footprints had been examined.
We will teach this miserableness traitor that he cannot undo  our work so easily.|We will teach this miserable traitor that he cannot undo  our work so easily.
Remember, comrades, there must be no alteration in our plans: they shall  be carry out to the day.|Remember, comrades, there must be no alteration in our plans: they shall  be carried out to the day.
forwardness, comrades!|Forward, comrades!
longness live the windmill!|Long live the windmill!
Long live Animal  Farm!”  It was a bitter wintery.|Long live Animal  Farm!”  It was a bitter winter.
The stormy weather was following by sleet and snow, and then by a  hard frost which did not break till well into February.|The stormy weather was followed by sleet and snow, and then by a  hard frost which did not break till well into February.
The animals carried on as best they  could with the rebuilding of the windmill, well knowing that the outside world was watching  them and that the envious human be would rejoice and triumph if the mill were not  finished on time.|The animals carried on as best they  could with the rebuilding of the windmill, well knowing that the outside world was watching  them and that the envious human beings would rejoice and triumph if the mill were not  finished on time.
Out of spite, the human beings pretended not to believe that it was Snowball who had  destroy the windmill: they said that it had fallen down because the walls were too thin.|Out of spite, the human beings pretended not to believe that it was Snowball who had  destroyer the windmill: they said that it had fallen down because the walls were too thin.
The  animalise knew that this was not the case.|The  animals knew that this was not the case.
Still, it had being decided to build the walls three feet  thick this time instead of eighteen inches as before, which meant collecting much larger  quantities of stone.|Still, it had been decided to build the walls three feet  thick this time instead of eighteen inches as before, which meant collecting much larger  quantities of stone.
Only box and Clover never lost heart.|Only Boxer and Clover never lost heart.
Squealer made  excellent speeches on the joy of service and the dignity of labour, but the other animals found  more inspire in Boxer’s strength and his never-failing cry of “I will work harder!”  In January food fell short.|Squealer made  excellent speeches on the joy of service and the dignity of labour, but the other animals found  more inspiration in Boxer’s strength and his never-failing cry of “I will work harder!”  In January food fell short.
The corn ration was drastically reduced, and it was announced that  an extra potato ration would be issued to making up for it.|The corn ration was drastically reduced, and it was announced that  an extra potato ration would be issued to make up for it.
Then it was discovered that the  greater part of the potato crop have been frosted in the clamps, which have not been covered  thickly enough.|Then it was discovered that the  greater part of the potato crop had been frosted in the clamps, which had not been covered  thickly enough.
The potatoes had become soft and discoloured, and only a few being edible.|The potatoes had become soft and discoloured, and only a few were edible.
Emboldened by the  collapse of the windmill, the human beings were invention fresh lies about Animal Farm.|Emboldened by the  collapse of the windmill, the human beings were inventing fresh lies about Animal Farm.
Once again it was being put about that all the animals were dying of famine and disease, and  that they were continually fighting among themselves and had resort to cannibalism and  infanticide.|Once again it was being put about that all the animals were dying of famine and disease, and  that they were continually fighting among themselves and had resorted to cannibalism and  infanticide.
Napoleon was well aware of the bad results that might follow if the real facts of  the food situation were known, and he deciding to make use of Mr. Whymper to spread a  contrary impression.|Napoleon was well aware of the bad results that might follow if the real facts of  the food situation were known, and he decided to make use of Mr. Whymper to spread a  contrary impression.
Hitherto the animals had had little or no contact with Whymper on his  weekly visits: now, however, a few selected animals, mostly sheep, were instructed to remark  casually in his hearing that ration had been increased.|Hitherto the animals had had little or no contact with Whymper on his  weekly visits: now, however, a few selected animals, mostly sheep, were instructed to remark  casually in his hearing that rations had been increased.
In addition, Napoleon ordering the  almost empty bins in the store-shed to be filled nearly to the brim with sand, which was then  covered up with what remained of the grain and meal.|In addition, Napoleon ordered the  almost empty bins in the store-shed to be filled nearly to the brim with sand, which was then  covered up with what remained of the grain and meal.
In these days Napoleon rarely appeared in public,  but spent all his time in the farmhouse, which was guard at each door by fierce-looking  dogs.|In these days Napoleon rarely appeared in public,  but spent all his time in the farmhouse, which was guarded at each door by fierce-looking  dogs.
When he did emerge, it was in a ceremonial manner, with an escort of six dog who  closely surrounded him and growled if anyone came too near.|When he did emerge, it was in a ceremonial manner, with an escort of six dogs who  closely surrounded him and growled if anyone came too near.
Frequently he did not even  appear on Sunday mornings, but issued his order through one of the other pigs, usually  Squealer.|Frequently he did not even  appear on Sunday mornings, but issued his orders through one of the other pigs, usually  Squealer.
One Sunday morning Squealer announced that the hens, who had just coming in to lay again,  must surrender their eggs.|One Sunday morning Squealer announced that the hens, who had just come in to lay again,  must surrender their eggs.
The price of these would pay for enough grain and meal to keep the  farm going till summer came on and condition were easier.|The price of these would pay for enough grain and meal to keep the  farm going till summer came on and conditions were easier.
They had been warned earlier that this  sacrifice might be necessary, but had not believed that it would really happening.|They had been warned earlier that this  sacrifice might be necessary, but had not believed that it would really happen.
Chandrasekhar realized, however, that there is a limit to the repulsion that the exclusion principle can provident.|Chandrasekhar realized, however, that there is a limit to the repulsion that the exclusion principle can provide.
The theorise of relativity limits the maximum difference in the velocities of the matter particles in the star to the speed of light.|The theory of relativity limits the maximum difference in the velocities of the matter particles in the star to the speed of light.
This mean that when the star got sufficiently dense, the repulsion caused by the exclusion principle would be less than the attraction of gravity.|This means that when the star got sufficiently dense, the repulsion caused by the exclusion principle would be less than the attraction of gravity.
A similar discovery was making about the same time by the Russian scientist Lev Davidovich Landau.|A similar discovery was made about the same time by the Russian scientist Lev Davidovich Landau.
This had serious implications for the ultimate fate of massive starry.|This had serious implications for the ultimate fate of massive stars.
If a starry’s mass is less than the Chandrasekhar limit, it can eventually stop contracting and settle down to a possible final state as a “white dwarf” with a radius of a few thousand miles and a density of hundreds of tons per cubic inch.|If a star’s mass is less than the Chandrasekhar limit, it can eventually stop contracting and settle down to a possible final state as a “white dwarf” with a radius of a few thousand miles and a density of hundreds of tons per cubic inch.
A white dwarf is supporter by the exclusion principle repulsion between the electrons in its matter.|A white dwarf is supported by the exclusion principle repulsion between the electrons in its matter.
We observe a large number of these white dwarf star.|We observe a large number of these white dwarf stars.
One of the first to be discovered is a starry that is orbiting around Sirius, the brightest starry in the night sky.|One of the first to be discovered is a star that is orbiting around Sirius, the brightest star in the night sky.
Landau pointed out that there was another possible finality state for a star, also with a limiting mass of about one or two times the mass of the sun but much smaller even than a white dwarf.|Landau pointed out that there was another possible final state for a star, also with a limiting mass of about one or two times the mass of the sun but much smaller even than a white dwarf.
These stars would be supporter by the exclusion principle repulsion between neutrons and protons, rather than between electrons.|These stars would be supported by the exclusion principle repulsion between neutrons and protons, rather than between electrons.
They were therefore called neutron star.|They were therefore called neutron stars.
At the time they being first predicted, there was no way that neutron stars could be observed.|At the time they were first predicted, there was no way that neutron stars could be observed.
They were not actually detecting until much later.|They were not actually detected until much later.
In some cases they may explode or manage to throw off enough matter to reduce their mass below the limit and so avoid catastrophic gravitational collapse, but it was difficult to believe that this always happening, no matter how big the star.|In some cases they may explode or manage to throw off enough matter to reduce their mass below the limit and so avoid catastrophic gravitational collapse, but it was difficult to believe that this always happened, no matter how big the star.
How would it know that it had to losings weight?|How would it know that it had to lose weight?
And even if every star managed to lose enough mass to avoid collapse, what would happen if you added more mass to a whiteness dwarf 'or neutron star to take it over the limit?|And even if every star managed to lose enough mass to avoid collapse, what would happen if you added more mass to a white dwarf 'or neutron star to take it over the limit?
Would it collapsible to infinite density?|Would it collapse to infinite density?
Eddington was shocked by that implicate, and he refused to believe Chandrasekhar’s result.|Eddington was shocked by that implication, and he refused to believe Chandrasekhar’s result.
Eddington think it was simply not possible that a star could collapse to a point.|Eddington thought it was simply not possible that a star could collapse to a point.
This was the view of most scientists: Einstein himself wrote a paper in which he claimed that starry would not shrink to zero size.|This was the view of most scientists: Einstein himself wrote a paper in which he claimed that stars would not shrink to zero size.
The hostility of other scientists, particularly Eddington, his former teacher and the leading authority on the structure of stars, persuaded Chandrasekhar to abandon this line of work and turn instead to other problems in astronomy, such as the motional of star clusters.|The hostility of other scientists, particularly Eddington, his former teacher and the leading authority on the structure of stars, persuaded Chandrasekhar to abandon this line of work and turn instead to other problems in astronomy, such as the motion of star clusters.
However, when he was awarded the Nobel Prize in 1983, it was, at least in part, for his early work on the limiting mass of cold starry.|However, when he was awarded the Nobel Prize in 1983, it was, at least in part, for his early work on the limiting mass of cold stars.
Chandrasekhar had shown that the exclusion principle could not halt the collapse of a star more massive than the Chandrasekhar limit, but the problem of understanding what would happen to such a star, according to general relativity, was first solvent by a young American, Robert Oppenheimer, in 1939.|Chandrasekhar had shown that the exclusion principle could not halt the collapse of a star more massive than the Chandrasekhar limit, but the problem of understanding what would happen to such a star, according to general relativity, was first solved by a young American, Robert Oppenheimer, in 1939.
His result, however, suggested that there would be no observational consequences that could be detecting by the telescopes of the day.|His result, however, suggested that there would be no observational consequences that could be detected by the telescopes of the day.
Then World War II intervened and Oppenheimer himself became closely involved in the atomise bomb project.|Then World War II intervened and Oppenheimer himself became closely involved in the atom bomb project.
After the war the problem of gravitational collapse was largely forgotten as most scientists became caught up in what happens on the scale of the atomise and its nucleus.|After the war the problem of gravitational collapse was largely forgotten as most scientists became caught up in what happens on the scale of the atom and its nucleus.
In the 1960s, however, interest in the large-scale problems of astronomy and cosmology was revival by a great increase in the number and range of astronomical observations brought about by the application of modern technology.|In the 1960s, however, interest in the large-scale problems of astronomy and cosmology was revived by a great increase in the number and range of astronomical observations brought about by the application of modern technology.
Oppenheimer’s work was then rediscovered and extensor by a number of people.|Oppenheimer’s work was then rediscovered and extended by a number of people.
The gravitational field of the starry changes the paths of light rays in space-time from what they would have been had the starry not been present.|The gravitational field of the star changes the paths of light rays in space-time from what they would have been had the star not been present.
The light cones, which indicate the paths following in space and time by flashes of light emitted from their tips, are bent slightly inward near the surface of the star.|The light cones, which indicate the paths followed in space and time by flashes of light emitted from their tips, are bent slightly inward near the surface of the star.
This can be seen in the bending of light from distant stars observance during an eclipse of the sun.|This can be seen in the bending of light from distant stars observed during an eclipse of the sun.
As the starry contracts, the gravitational field at its surface gets stronger and the light cones get bent inward more.|As the star contracts, the gravitational field at its surface gets stronger and the light cones get bent inward more.
This makes it more difficultness for light from the star to escape, and the light appears dimmer and redder to an observer at a distance.Suppose an intrepid astronaut on the surface of the collapsing star, collapsing inward with it, sent a signal every second, according to his watch, to his spaceship orbiting about the star.|This makes it more difficult for light from the star to escape, and the light appears dimmer and redder to an observer at a distance.Suppose an intrepid astronaut on the surface of the collapsing star, collapsing inward with it, sent a signal every second, according to his watch, to his spaceship orbiting about the star.
At some time on his watch, say 11:00, the star would shrink below the critic radius at which the gravitational field becomes so strong nothing can escape, and his signals would no longer reach the spaceship.|At some time on his watch, say 11:00, the star would shrink below the critical radius at which the gravitational field becomes so strong nothing can escape, and his signals would no longer reach the spaceship.
As 11:00 approached his companions watching from the spaceship would find the intervals between successive signals from the astronautical getting longer and longer, but this effect would be very small before 10:59:59.|As 11:00 approached his companions watching from the spaceship would find the intervals between successive signals from the astronaut getting longer and longer, but this effect would be very small before 10:59:59.
They would have to wait only very slightly more than a second between the astronautical’s 10:59:58 signal and the one that he sent when his watch read 10:59:59, but they would have to wait forever for the 11:00 signal.|They would have to wait only very slightly more than a second between the astronaut’s 10:59:58 signal and the one that he sent when his watch read 10:59:59, but they would have to wait forever for the 11:00 signal.
The time interval between the arrive of successive waves at the spaceship would get longer and longer, so the light from the star would appear redder and redder and fainter and fainter.|The time interval between the arrival of successive waves at the spaceship would get longer and longer, so the light from the star would appear redder and redder and fainter and fainter.
Eventually, the star would be so dim that it could no longer be seen from the spatialship: all that would be left would be a black hole in spatial.|Eventually, the star would be so dim that it could no longer be seen from the spaceship: all that would be left would be a black hole in space.
Gravity gets weaker the farther you are from the star, so the gravitational force on our intrepid astronaut’s foot would always be greater than the force on his head.|Gravity gets weaker the farther you are from the star, so the gravitational force on our intrepid astronaut’s feet would always be greater than the force on his head.
This differentiate in the forces would stretch our astronaut out like spaghetti or tear him apart before the star had contracted to the critical radius at which the event horizon formed!|This difference in the forces would stretch our astronaut out like spaghetti or tear him apart before the star had contracted to the critical radius at which the event horizon formed!
However, we believe that there are much largeness objects in the universe, like the central regions of galaxies, that can also undergo gravitational collapse to produce black holes; an astronaut on one of these would not be torn apart before the black hole formed.|However, we believe that there are much larger objects in the universe, like the central regions of galaxies, that can also undergo gravitational collapse to produce black holes; an astronaut on one of these would not be torn apart before the black hole formed.
He would not, in fact, feel anything special as he reached the critical radius, and could pass the point of no return without noticeable it However, within just a few hours, as the region continued to collapse, the difference in the gravitational forces on his head and his feet would become so strong that again it would tear him apart.|He would not, in fact, feel anything special as he reached the critical radius, and could pass the point of no return without noticing it However, within just a few hours, as the region continued to collapse, the difference in the gravitational forces on his head and his feet would become so strong that again it would tear him apart.
The work that Roger Penrose and I did between 1965 and 1970 showed that, according to general relative, there must be a singularity of infinite density and space-time curvature within a black hole.|The work that Roger Penrose and I did between 1965 and 1970 showed that, according to general relativity, there must be a singularity of infinite density and space-time curvature within a black hole.
This is rather like the big bang at the beingginning of time, only it would being an end of time for the collapsing body and the astronaut.|This is rather like the big bang at the beginning of time, only it would be an end of time for the collapsing body and the astronaut.
At this singularity the laws of science and our ability to predict the future would break downer.|At this singularity the laws of science and our ability to predict the future would break down.
However, any observer who remained outside the black hole would not be affected by this failure of predictable, because neither light nor any other signal could reach him from the singularity.|However, any observer who remained outside the black hole would not be affected by this failure of predictability, because neither light nor any other signal could reach him from the singularity.
This remarkable fact led Roger Penrose to propose the cosmic censorship hypothesis, which might be paraphrased as “God abhors a naked singularity.” In other words, the singularities produced by gravitational collapsible occur only in places, like black holes, where they are decently hidden from outside view by an event horizon.|This remarkable fact led Roger Penrose to propose the cosmic censorship hypothesis, which might be paraphrased as “God abhors a naked singularity.” In other words, the singularities produced by gravitational collapse occur only in places, like black holes, where they are decently hidden from outside view by an event horizon.
Strictly, this is what is known as the weak cosmic censorship hypothesis: it protects observers who remain outside the black hole from the consequences of the breakdown of predictable that occurs at the singularity, but it does nothing at all for the poor unfortunate astronaut who falls into the hole.There are some solutions of the equations of general relativity in which it is possible for our astronaut to see a naked singularity: he may be able to avoid hitting the singularity and instead fall through a "wormhole” and come out in another region of the universe.|Strictly, this is what is known as the weak cosmic censorship hypothesis: it protects observers who remain outside the black hole from the consequences of the breakdown of predictability that occurs at the singularity, but it does nothing at all for the poor unfortunate astronaut who falls into the hole.There are some solutions of the equations of general relativity in which it is possible for our astronaut to see a naked singularity: he may be able to avoid hitting the singularity and instead fall through a "wormhole” and come out in another region of the universe.
This would offer great possibilities for travel in space and time, but unfortunately it seems that these solutions may all be highly unstable; the least disturbance, such as the presence of an astronaut, may change them so that the astronaut could not see the singularity until he hit it and his time coming to an end.|This would offer great possibilities for travel in space and time, but unfortunately it seems that these solutions may all be highly unstable; the least disturbance, such as the presence of an astronaut, may change them so that the astronaut could not see the singularity until he hit it and his time came to an end.
The strong version of the cosmic censorship hypothesis states that in a realistic solve, the singularities would always lie either entirely in the future (like the singularities of gravitational collapse) or entirely in the past (like the , big bang).|The strong version of the cosmic censorship hypothesis states that in a realistic solution, the singularities would always lie either entirely in the future (like the singularities of gravitational collapse) or entirely in the past (like the , big bang).
I strongly believable in cosmic censorship so I bet Kip Thorne and John Preskill of Cal Tech that it would always hold.|I strongly believe in cosmic censorship so I bet Kip Thorne and John Preskill of Cal Tech that it would always hold.
I lost the bet on a technical because examples were produced of solutions with a singularity that was visible from a long way away.|I lost the bet on a technicality because examples were produced of solutions with a singularity that was visible from a long way away.
So I had to pay up, which accordance to the terms of the bet meant I had to clothe their nakedness.|So I had to pay up, which according to the terms of the bet meant I had to clothe their nakedness.
The naked singularities were unstable: the least disturbance would causative them either to disappear or to be hidden behind an event horizon.|The naked singularities were unstable: the least disturbance would cause them either to disappear or to be hidden behind an event horizon.
The event horizon, the bound of the region of space-time from which it is not possible to escape, acts rather like a one-way membrane around the black hole: objects, such as unwary astronauts, can fall through the event horizon into the black hole, but nothing can ever get out of the black hole through the event horizon.|The event horizon, the boundary of the region of space-time from which it is not possible to escape, acts rather like a one-way membrane around the black hole: objects, such as unwary astronauts, can fall through the event horizon into the black hole, but nothing can ever get out of the black hole through the event horizon.
(Remember that the event horizon is the path in space-time of light that is trying to escape from the blackness hole, and nothing can travel faster than light.)|(Remember that the event horizon is the path in space-time of light that is trying to escape from the black hole, and nothing can travel faster than light.)
One could well say of the event horizon what the poetic Dante said of the entrance to Hell: “All hope abandon, ye who enter here.” Anything or anyone who falls through the event horizon will soon reach the region of infinite density and the end of time.|One could well say of the event horizon what the poet Dante said of the entrance to Hell: “All hope abandon, ye who enter here.” Anything or anyone who falls through the event horizon will soon reach the region of infinite density and the end of time.
General relativity predicts that heavy objects that are moving will causative the emission of gravitational waves, ripples in the curvature of space that travel at the speed of light.|General relativity predicts that heavy objects that are moving will cause the emission of gravitational waves, ripples in the curvature of space that travel at the speed of light.
These are similar to light waves, which are ripple of the electromagnetic field, but they are much harder to detect.|These are similar to light waves, which are ripples of the electromagnetic field, but they are much harder to detect.
They can be observed by the very slight change in separation they produce between neighboring freely moving object.|They can be observed by the very slight change in separation they produce between neighboring freely moving objects.
A number of detectors are being built in the United States,Europe, and Japan that will measurable displacements of one part in a thousand million million million (1 with twenty-one zeros after it), or less than the nucleus of an atom over a distance of ten miles.|A number of detectors are being built in the United States,Europe, and Japan that will measure displacements of one part in a thousand million million million (1 with twenty-one zeros after it), or less than the nucleus of an atom over a distance of ten miles.
Like light, gravitational waves carry energetic away from the objects that emit them.|Like light, gravitational waves carry energy away from the objects that emit them.
One would therefore expect a systemise of massive objects to settle down eventually to a stationary state, because the energy in any movement would be carried away by the emission of gravitational waves.|One would therefore expect a system of massive objects to settle down eventually to a stationary state, because the energy in any movement would be carried away by the emission of gravitational waves.
(It is rather like dropping a cork into water: at first it bobs up and down a great deal, but as the ripple carry away its energy, it eventually settles down to a stationary state.)|(It is rather like dropping a cork into water: at first it bobs up and down a great deal, but as the ripples carry away its energy, it eventually settles down to a stationary state.)
For example, the movement of the earth in its orbital round the sun produces gravitational waves.|For example, the movement of the earth in its orbit round the sun produces gravitational waves.
The effect of the energy loss will be to change the orbit of the earth so that gradually it gets nearer and nearer to the sun, eventually collides with it, and settle down to a stationary state.|The effect of the energy loss will be to change the orbit of the earth so that gradually it gets nearer and nearer to the sun, eventually collides with it, and settles down to a stationary state.
The rate of energy loss in the case of the earth and the sun is very low – about enough to run a small electricity heater.|The rate of energy loss in the case of the earth and the sun is very low – about enough to run a small electric heater.
This mean it will take about a thousand million million million million years for the earth to run into the sun, so there’s no immediate cause for worry!|This means it will take about a thousand million million million million years for the earth to run into the sun, so there’s no immediate cause for worry!
The change in the orbit of the earth being too slow to be observed, but thbeing same effect has been observed over the past few years occurring in the system called PSR 1913 + 16 (PSR stands for “pulsar,” a special type of neutron star that emits regular pulses of radio waves).|The change in the orbit of the earth is too slow to be observed, but this same effect has been observed over the past few years occurring in the system called PSR 1913 + 16 (PSR stands for “pulsar,” a special type of neutron star that emits regular pulses of radio waves).
This system contains two neutron stars orbital each other, and the energy they are losing by the emission of gravitational waves is causing them to spiral in toward each other.|This system contains two neutron stars orbiting each other, and the energy they are losing by the emission of gravitational waves is causing them to spiral in toward each other.
This confirm of general relativity won J. H. Taylor and R. A. Hulse the Nobel Prize in 1993.|This confirmation of general relativity won J. H. Taylor and R. A. Hulse the Nobel Prize in 1993.
justness before they do, they will be orbiting so fast that they will emit enough gravitational waves for detectors like LIGO to pick up.|Just before they do, they will be orbiting so fast that they will emit enough gravitational waves for detectors like LIGO to pick up.
During the gravitational collapse of a starry to form a black hole, the movements would be much more rapid, so the rate at which energy is carried away would be much higher.|During the gravitational collapse of a star to form a black hole, the movements would be much more rapid, so the rate at which energy is carried away would be much higher.
It would therefore not being too long ' beingfore it settled down to a stationary state.|It would therefore not be too long ' before it settled down to a stationary state.
One might suppose that it would depend on all the complex features of the star from which it had formed – not only its mass and rate of rotation, but also the differ densities of various parts of the star, and the complicated movements of the gases within the star.|One might suppose that it would depend on all the complex features of the star from which it had formed – not only its mass and rate of rotation, but also the different densities of various parts of the star, and the complicated movements of the gases within the star.
And if black holes being as varied as the objects that collapsed to form them, it might be very difficult to make any predictions about black holes in general.|And if black holes were as varied as the objects that collapsed to form them, it might be very difficult to make any predictions about black holes in general.
In 1967, however, the study of black hole was revolutionized by Werner Israel, a Canadian scientist (who was born in Berlin, brought up in South Africa, and took his doctoral degree in Ireland).|In 1967, however, the study of black holes was revolutionized by Werner Israel, a Canadian scientist (who was born in Berlin, brought up in South Africa, and took his doctoral degree in Ireland).
Israel showed that, accordance to general relativity, non-rotating black holes must be very simple; they were perfectly spherical, their size depended only on their mass, and any two such black holes with the same mass were identical.|Israel showed that, according to general relativity, non-rotating black holes must be very simple; they were perfectly spherical, their size depended only on their mass, and any two such black holes with the same mass were identical.
They could, in fact, be described by a particular solution of Einstein’s equations that had been known since 1917, found by Karl Schwarzschild shortly after the discovery of general relative.|They could, in fact, be described by a particular solution of Einstein’s equations that had been known since 1917, found by Karl Schwarzschild shortly after the discovery of general relativity.
At first many people, including Israel himself, argued that since blackness holes had to be perfectly spherical, a blackness hole could only form from the collapse of a perfectly spherical object.|At first many people, including Israel himself, argued that since black holes had to be perfectly spherical, a black hole could only form from the collapse of a perfectly spherical object.
Any real starry – which would never be perfectly spherical – could therefore only collapse to form a naked singularity.|Any real star – which would never be perfectly spherical – could therefore only collapse to form a naked singularity.
There was, however, a different interpretation of Israel’s result, which was advocated by Roger Penrose and John Wheeler in particularity.|There was, however, a different interpretation of Israel’s result, which was advocated by Roger Penrose and John Wheeler in particular.
They argued that the rapid movements involved in a star’s collapse would mean that the gravitational waves it giving off would make it ever more spherical, and by the time it had settled down to a stationary state, it would be precisely spherical.|They argued that the rapid movements involved in a star’s collapse would mean that the gravitational waves it gave off would make it ever more spherical, and by the time it had settled down to a stationary state, it would be precisely spherical.
According to this view, any non-rotating star, however complicated its shape and internal structure, would end up after gravitational collapsible as a perfectly spherical black hole, whose size would depend only on its mass.|According to this view, any non-rotating star, however complicated its shape and internal structure, would end up after gravitational collapse as a perfectly spherical black hole, whose size would depend only on its mass.
Further calculations supported this view, and it soon came to be adoption generally.|Further calculations supported this view, and it soon came to be adopted generally.
Israel’s result dealt with the case of black holes formed from non-rotating bodily only.|Israel’s result dealt with the case of black holes formed from non-rotating bodies only.
In 1963, Roy Kerr, a New Zealander, found a set of solutions of the equations of general relativity that described rotating blackness holes.|In 1963, Roy Kerr, a New Zealander, found a set of solutions of the equations of general relativity that described rotating black holes.
These “Kerr” blackness holes rotate at a constant rate, their size and shape depending only on their mass and rate of rotation.|These “Kerr” black holes rotate at a constant rate, their size and shape depending only on their mass and rate of rotation.
If the rotation is zero, the black hole is perfectly round and the solution is identicalness to the Schwarzschild solution.|If the rotation is zero, the black hole is perfectly round and the solution is identical to the Schwarzschild solution.
If the rotation is non-zero, the black hole bulges outward near its equator (just as the earthly or the sun bulge due to their rotation), and the faster it rotates, the more it bulges.|If the rotation is non-zero, the black hole bulges outward near its equator (just as the earth or the sun bulge due to their rotation), and the faster it rotates, the more it bulges.
So, to extend Israel’s result to include rotatory bodies, it was conjectured that any rotatory body that collapsed to form a black hole would eventually settle down to a stationary state described by the Kerr solution.|So, to extend Israel’s result to include rotating bodies, it was conjectured that any rotating body that collapsed to form a black hole would eventually settle down to a stationary state described by the Kerr solution.
In 1970 a colleague and fellow research student of mine at Cambridge, Brandon Carter, take the first step toward proving this conjecture.|In 1970 a colleague and fellow research student of mine at Cambridge, Brandon Carter, took the first step toward proving this conjecture.
He showed that, provided a stationary rotating black hole had an axis of symmetric, like a spinning top, its size and shape would depend only on its mass and rate of rotation.|He showed that, provided a stationary rotating black hole had an axis of symmetry, like a spinning top, its size and shape would depend only on its mass and rate of rotation.
Then, in 1971, I proved that any stationary rotatory black hole would indeed have such an axis of symmetry.|Then, in 1971, I proved that any stationary rotating black hole would indeed have such an axis of symmetry.
Finally, in 1973, David Robinson at Kings College, London, used Carter’s and my results to show that the conjecture had beingen correct: such a black hole had indeed to being the Kerr solution.|Finally, in 1973, David Robinson at Kings College, London, used Carter’s and my results to show that the conjecture had been correct: such a black hole had indeed to be the Kerr solution.
So after gravitational collapse a black hole must settle down into a state in which it could be rotatory, but not pulsating.|So after gravitational collapse a black hole must settle down into a state in which it could be rotating, but not pulsating.
This result became known by the maxim: “A black hole has no hair.” The “no hair” theorem is of greatness practical importance, because it so greatnessly restricts the possible types of black holes.|This result became known by the maxim: “A black hole has no hair.” The “no hair” theorem is of great practical importance, because it so greatly restricts the possible types of black holes.
One can therefore make detailed models of objects that might continent black holes and compare the predictions of the models with observations.|One can therefore make detailed models of objects that might contain black holes and compare the predictions of the models with observations.
It also means that a very large amount of information aboutA Brief History of Time - Stephen Hawking... Chapter 6   the body that has collapsed must be losings when a black hole is formed, because afterward all we can possibly measure about the body is its mass and rate of rotation.|It also means that a very large amount of information aboutA Brief History of Time - Stephen Hawking... Chapter 6   the body that has collapsed must be lost when a black hole is formed, because afterward all we can possibly measure about the body is its mass and rate of rotation.
The signify of this will be seen in the next chapter.|The significance of this will be seen in the next chapter.
Black holes are one of only a fairly small number of cases in the history of science in which a theory was developed in greatness detail as a mathematical model before there was any evidence from observations that it was correct.|Black holes are one of only a fairly small number of cases in the history of science in which a theory was developed in great detail as a mathematical model before there was any evidence from observations that it was correct.
Indeed, this used to be the main argument of opponents of black holes: how could one believe in objects for which the only evidence was calculations baseness on the dubious theory of general relativity?|Indeed, this used to be the main argument of opponents of black holes: how could one believe in objects for which the only evidence was calculations based on the dubious theory of general relativity?
In 1963, however, Maarten Schmidt, an astronomer at the Palomar Observatory in California, measured the red shift of a faint starlike object in the direction of the source of radio waves called 3C273 (that is, source numerical 273 in the third Cambridge catalogue of radio sources).|In 1963, however, Maarten Schmidt, an astronomer at the Palomar Observatory in California, measured the red shift of a faint starlike object in the direction of the source of radio waves called 3C273 (that is, source number 273 in the third Cambridge catalogue of radio sources).
He found it was too large to be cause by a gravitational field: if it had been a gravitational red shift, the object would have to be so massive and so near to us that it would disturb the orbits of planets in the Solar System.|He found it was too large to be caused by a gravitational field: if it had been a gravitational red shift, the object would have to be so massive and so near to us that it would disturb the orbits of planets in the Solar System.
This suggested that the red shift was instead caused by the expansion of the universe, which, in turn, meant that the object was a very longness distance away.|This suggested that the red shift was instead caused by the expansion of the universe, which, in turn, meant that the object was a very long distance away.
And to be visible at such a great distance, the object must be very bright, must, in other words, be emitter a huge amount of energy.|And to be visible at such a great distance, the object must be very bright, must, in other words, be emitting a huge amount of energy.
The only mechanism that people could think of that would produce such largeness quantities of energy seemed to be the gravitational collapse not just of a star but of a whole central region of a galaxy.|The only mechanism that people could think of that would produce such large quantities of energy seemed to be the gravitational collapse not just of a star but of a whole central region of a galaxy.
A number of other similarity “quasi-stellar objects,” or quasars, have been discovered, all with large red shifts.|A number of other similar “quasi-stellar objects,” or quasars, have been discovered, all with large red shifts.
But they are all too far away and therefore too difficult to observe to provident conclusive evidence of black holes.|But they are all too far away and therefore too difficult to observe to provide conclusive evidence of black holes.
Further encouragement for the existence of black holes coming in 1967 with the discovery by a research student at Cambridge, Jocelyn Bell-Burnell, of objects in the sky that were emitting regular pulses of radio waves.|Further encouragement for the existence of black holes came in 1967 with the discovery by a research student at Cambridge, Jocelyn Bell-Burnell, of objects in the sky that were emitting regular pulses of radio waves.
At first Bell and her supervise, Antony Hewish, thought they might have made contact with an alien civilization in the galaxy!|At first Bell and her supervisor, Antony Hewish, thought they might have made contact with an alien civilization in the galaxy!
Indeed, at the seminar at which they announced their discovery, I remember that they called the first four sources to be found LGM 1 – 4, LGM standing for “Little Green Men.” In the end, however, they and everyone else came to the less romantic conclusion that these objects, which were given the name pulsars, were in fact rotating neutron stars that were emitting pulses of radio waves because of a complicated interaction between their magnet fields and surrounding matter.|Indeed, at the seminar at which they announced their discovery, I remember that they called the first four sources to be found LGM 1 – 4, LGM standing for “Little Green Men.” In the end, however, they and everyone else came to the less romantic conclusion that these objects, which were given the name pulsars, were in fact rotating neutron stars that were emitting pulses of radio waves because of a complicated interaction between their magnetic fields and surrounding matter.
This was bad news for writers of space westerns, but very hopeful for the small number of us who believer in black holes at that time: it was the first positive evidence that neutron stars existed.|This was bad news for writers of space westerns, but very hopeful for the small number of us who believed in black holes at that time: it was the first positive evidence that neutron stars existed.
A neutron star has a radius of about ten miles, only a few times the critic radius at which a star becomes a black hole.|A neutron star has a radius of about ten miles, only a few times the critical radius at which a star becomes a black hole.
If a starry could collapse to such a small size, it is not unreasonable to expect that other starrys could collapse to even smaller size and become black holes.|If a star could collapse to such a small size, it is not unreasonable to expect that other stars could collapse to even smaller size and become black holes.
How could we hope to detect a black hole, as by its very definition it doer not emit any light?|How could we hope to detect a black hole, as by its very definition it does not emit any light?
Astronomers have observed many systems in which two stars orbit around each other, attractive toward each other by gravity.|Astronomers have observed many systems in which two stars orbit around each other, attracted toward each other by gravity.
They also observe systems in which there is only one visible star that is orbital around some unseen companion.|They also observe systems in which there is only one visible star that is orbiting around some unseen companion.
One cannot, of course, immediately conclude that the companion being a black hole: it might merely be a star that being too faint to be seen.|One cannot, of course, immediately conclude that the companion is a black hole: it might merely be a star that is too faint to be seen.
However, some of these systemise, like the one called Cygnus X-1 Figure 6:2, are also strong sources of X-rays.For this mechanism to work, the unseen object has to be very small, like a white dwarf, neutron star, or black hole.|However, some of these systems, like the one called Cygnus X-1 Figure 6:2, are also strong sources of X-rays.For this mechanism to work, the unseen object has to be very small, like a white dwarf, neutron star, or black hole.
From the observed orbit of the visible star, one can determine the low possible mass of the unseen object.|From the observed orbit of the visible star, one can determine the lowest possible mass of the unseen object.
In the case of Cygnus X-l, thbeing being about six times the mass of the sun, which, according to Chandrasekhar’r result, being too great for the unseen object to be a white dwarf.|In the case of Cygnus X-l, this is about six times the mass of the sun, which, according to Chandrasekhar’r result, is too great for the unseen object to be a white dwarf.
It is also too largeness a mass to be a neutron star.|It is also too large a mass to be a neutron star.
It seems, therefore, that it must being a black hole.|It seems, therefore, that it must be a black hole.
A black hole seems to be the only really natural explanation of the observe.|A black hole seems to be the only really natural explanation of the observations.
Despite this, I have a bet with Kip Thorne of the California Institute of Technology that in fact Cygnus X-1 does not contain a black hole!|Despite this, I had a bet with Kip Thorne of the California Institute of Technology that in fact Cygnus X-1 does not contain a black hole!
This was a form f insure policy for me.|This was a form f insurance policy for me.
I have done a lot of work on blackness holes, and it would all be wasted if it turned out that blackness holes do not exist.|I have done a lot of work on black holes, and it would all be wasted if it turned out that black holes do not exist.
But in that case, I would have the console of winning my bet, which would bring me four years of the magazine Private Eye.|But in that case, I would have the consolation of winning my bet, which would bring me four years of the magazine Private Eye.
In fact, although the situate with Cygnus X-1 has not changed much since we made the bet in 1975, there is now so much other observational evidence in favor of black holes that I have conceded the bet.|In fact, although the situation with Cygnus X-1 has not changed much since we made the bet in 1975, there is now so much other observational evidence in favor of black holes that I have conceded the bet.
I paid the specified penalty, which was a one-year subscription to Penthouse, to the outrage of Kip’s liberated wifely.|I paid the specified penalty, which was a one-year subscription to Penthouse, to the outrage of Kip’s liberated wife.
We also now have evidence for several other black hole in systems like Cygnus X-1 in our galaxy and in two neighboring galaxies called the Magellanic Clouds.|We also now have evidence for several other black holes in systems like Cygnus X-1 in our galaxy and in two neighboring galaxies called the Magellanic Clouds.
The number of black holes, however, being almost certainly very much higher; in the long hbeingtory of the universe, many stars must have burned all their nuclear fuel and have had to collapse.|The number of black holes, however, is almost certainly very much higher; in the long history of the universe, many stars must have burned all their nuclear fuel and have had to collapse.
The number of black holes may well be greater even than the number of visible stars, which totals about a hundred thousand million in our galactic alone.|The number of black holes may well be greater even than the number of visible stars, which totals about a hundred thousand million in our galaxy alone.
The extra gravitational attraction of such a large number of black holes could explain why our galaxy rotates at the rate it does: the mass of the visible star is insufficient to account for this.|The extra gravitational attraction of such a large number of black holes could explain why our galaxy rotates at the rate it does: the mass of the visible stars is insufficient to account for this.
Stars in the galaxy that come too near this black hole will be torn apart by the difference in the gravitational force on their near and far sides.|Stars in the galaxy that come too near this black hole will be torn apart by the difference in the gravitational forces on their near and far sides.
Their remains and gas that is thrown off otherness stars, will fall toward the black hole.|Their remains and gas that is thrown off other stars, will fall toward the black hole.
It will not get hotness enough to emit X rays, but it could account for the very compact source of radio waves and infrared rays that is observed at the galactic center.|It will not get hot enough to emit X rays, but it could account for the very compact source of radio waves and infrared rays that is observed at the galactic center.
It is thought that similar but even larger blackness holes, with masses of about a hundred million times the mass of the sun, occur at the centers of quasars.|It is thought that similar but even larger black holes, with masses of about a hundred million times the mass of the sun, occur at the centers of quasars.
For example, observations with the Hubble telescope of the galaxy known as M87 reveal that it contains a disk of gas 130 light-years across rotating about a centrality object two thousand million times the mass of the sun.|For example, observations with the Hubble telescope of the galaxy known as M87 reveal that it contains a disk of gas 130 light-years across rotating about a central object two thousand million times the mass of the sun.
Matter falling into such a supermassive black hole would provide the only source of power great enough to explain the enormous amount of energy that these objects are emitting.|Matter falling into such a supermassive black hole would provide the only source of power great enough to explain the enormous amounts of energy that these objects are emitting.
As the matter spirals into the black hole, it would make the black hole rotate in the same direction, causing it to development a magnetic field rather like that of the earth.|As the matter spirals into the black hole, it would make the black hole rotate in the same direction, causing it to develop a magnetic field rather like that of the earth.
Very high-energy particles would being generated near the black hole by the in-falling matter.|Very high-energy particles would be generated near the black hole by the in-falling matter.
The magnetic field would be so strong that it could focus these particles into jets ejected outward along the axis of rotation of the black hole, that is, in the directions of its north and south polar.|The magnetic field would be so strong that it could focus these particles into jets ejected outward along the axis of rotation of the black hole, that is, in the directions of its north and south poles.
Such jet are indeed observed in a number of galaxies and quasars.|Such jets are indeed observed in a number of galaxies and quasars.
One can also consider the possibility that there might be black holes with mass much less than that of the sun.|One can also consider the possibility that there might be black holes with masses much less than that of the sun.
Such black holes could not be formed by gravitational collapse, because their masses are belowness the Chandrasekhar mass limit: stars of this lowness mass can support themselves against the force of gravity even when they have exhausted their nuclear fuel.|Such black holes could not be formed by gravitational collapse, because their masses are below the Chandrasekhar mass limit: stars of this low mass can support themselves against the force of gravity even when they have exhausted their nuclear fuel.
Low-mass black holes could form only if matter was compressed to enormous densities by very large external pressure.|Low-mass black holes could form only if matter was compressed to enormous densities by very large external pressures.
Such conditions could occur in a very big hydrogen bomb: the physicist John Wheeler once calculated that if one took all the heavy water in all the oceans of the world, one could build a hydrogen bomb that would compress matter at the center so much that a black hole would be creative.|Such conditions could occur in a very big hydrogen bomb: the physicist John Wheeler once calculated that if one took all the heavy water in all the oceans of the world, one could build a hydrogen bomb that would compress matter at the center so much that a black hole would be created.
A more practical possibility being that such low-mass black holes might have been formed in the high temperatures and pressures of the very early universe.|A more practical possibility is that such low-mass black holes might have been formed in the high temperatures and pressures of the very early universe.
Black holes would have being formed only if the early universe had not being perfectly smooth and uniform, because only a small region that was denser than average could be compressed in this way to form a black hole.|Black holes would have been formed only if the early universe had not been perfectly smooth and uniform, because only a small region that was denser than average could be compressed in this way to form a black hole.
But we know that there must have beingen some irregularities, beingcause otherwise the matter in the universe would still being perfectly uniformly distributed at the present epoch, instead of beinging clumped together in stars and galaxies.|But we know that there must have been some irregularities, because otherwise the matter in the universe would still be perfectly uniformly distributed at the present epoch, instead of being clumped together in stars and galaxies.
Whether the irregularities required to account for stars and galaxies would have led to the formation of a significant number of “primordial” blackness holes clearly depends on the details of the conditions in the early universe.|Whether the irregularities required to account for stars and galaxies would have led to the formation of a significant number of “primordial” black holes clearly depends on the details of the conditions in the early universe.
So if we could determine how many primordial blackness holes there are now, we would learn a lot about the very early stages of the universe.|So if we could determine how many primordial black holes there are now, we would learn a lot about the very early stages of the universe.
Primordial black holes with masses more than a thousand million tons (the mass of a large mountain) could be detected only by their gravitational influence on otherness, visible matter or on the expansion of the universe.|Primordial black holes with masses more than a thousand million tons (the mass of a large mountain) could be detected only by their gravitational influence on other, visible matter or on the expansion of the universe.
However, as we shall learn in the next chapter, black holes are not really black after all: they glow like a hotness body, and the smaller they are, the more they glow.|However, as we shall learn in the next chapter, black holes are not really black after all: they glow like a hot body, and the smaller they are, the more they glow.
So, paradoxically, smaller black holes might actually turn out to be easier to detect than large ones!Before 1970, my research on general relativity had concentrated mainly on the question of whether or not there had being a big bang singularity.|So, paradoxically, smaller black holes might actually turn out to be easier to detect than large ones!Before 1970, my research on general relativity had concentrated mainly on the question of whether or not there had been a big bang singularity.
However, one even in November that year, shortly after the birth of my daughter, Lucy, I started to think about black holes as I was getting into bed.|However, one evening in November that year, shortly after the birth of my daughter, Lucy, I started to think about black holes as I was getting into bed.
At that date there being no precise definition of which points in space-time lay inside a black hole and which lay outside.|At that date there was no precise definition of which points in space-time lay inside a black hole and which lay outside.
I had already discussed with Roger Penrose the idea of defining a black hole as the set of events from which it was not possibleness to escape to a large distance, which is now the generally accepted definition.|I had already discussed with Roger Penrose the idea of defining a black hole as the set of events from which it was not possible to escape to a large distance, which is now the generally accepted definition.
It means that the boundary of the black hole, the event horizon, is formed by the light rays that justness fail to escape from the black hole, hovering forever justness on the edge Figure 7:1.|It means that the boundary of the black hole, the event horizon, is formed by the light rays that just fail to escape from the black hole, hovering forever just on the edge Figure 7:1.
It is a bit like running away from the police and just managing to keep one step ahead but not being able to get clearness away!|It is a bit like running away from the police and just managing to keep one step ahead but not being able to get clear away!
Suddenly I realized that the paths of these light ray could never approach one another.|Suddenly I realized that the paths of these light rays could never approach one another.
It would being like meeting someone else running away from the police in the opposite direction – you would both being caught!|It would be like meeting someone else running away from the police in the opposite direction – you would both be caught!
But if these light rays were swallowed up by the black hole, then they could not have been on the bound of the black hole.|But if these light rays were swallowed up by the black hole, then they could not have been on the boundary of the black hole.
So the paths of light rays in theevent horizon had always to being moving parallel to, or away from, each other.|So the paths of light rays in theevent horizon had always to be moving parallel to, or away from, each other.
If you look at the shadow cast by a source at a greatness distance, such as the sun, you will see that the rays of light in the edge are not approaching each other.|If you look at the shadow cast by a source at a great distance, such as the sun, you will see that the rays of light in the edge are not approaching each other.
If the rays of light that form the event horizon, the boundary of the black hole, can never approach each other, the area of the event horizon might stay the same or increase with time, but it could never decrease because that would mean that at least some of the rays of light in the boundary would have to be approach each other.The nondecreasing behavior of a black hole’s area was very reminiscent of the behavior of a physical quantity called entropy, which measures the degree of disorder of a system.|If the rays of light that form the event horizon, the boundary of the black hole, can never approach each other, the area of the event horizon might stay the same or increase with time, but it could never decrease because that would mean that at least some of the rays of light in the boundary would have to be approaching each other.The nondecreasing behavior of a black hole’s area was very reminiscent of the behavior of a physical quantity called entropy, which measures the degree of disorder of a system.
It is a matter of common experiential that disorder will tend to increase if things are left to themselves.|It is a matter of common experience that disorder will tend to increase if things are left to themselves.
(One has only to stop making repairs around the house to seeing that!)|(One has only to stop making repairs around the house to see that!)
One can creative order out of disorder (for example, one can paint the house), but that requires expenditure of effort or energy and so decreases the amount of ordered energy available.|One can create order out of disorder (for example, one can paint the house), but that requires expenditure of effort or energy and so decreases the amount of ordered energy available.
A precise statement of this ideate is known as the second law of thermodynamics.|A precise statement of this idea is known as the second law of thermodynamics.
It states that the entropy of an isolated system always increases, and that when two systems are joined together, the entropy of the combined system is greatness than the sum of the entropies of the individual systems.|It states that the entropy of an isolated system always increases, and that when two systems are joined together, the entropy of the combined system is greater than the sum of the entropies of the individual systems.
For example, consider a systemise of gas molecules in a box.|For example, consider a system of gas molecules in a box.
The molecules can be thought of as little billiard balls continually colliding with each other and bouncer off the walls of the box.|The molecules can be thought of as little billiard balls continually colliding with each other and bouncing off the walls of the box.
The higher the temperature of the gas, the faster the molecules move, and so the more frequently and harder they collide with the wall of the box and the greater the outward pressure they exert on the wall.|The higher the temperature of the gas, the faster the molecules move, and so the more frequently and harder they collide with the walls of the box and the greater the outward pressure they exert on the walls.
supposal that initially the molecules are all confined to the left-hand side of the box by a partition.|Suppose that initially the molecules are all confined to the left-hand side of the box by a partition.
At some later time they could, by chance, all be in the right half or back in the left half, but it is overwhelmingly more probability that there will be roughly equal numbers in the two halves.|At some later time they could, by chance, all be in the right half or back in the left half, but it is overwhelmingly more probable that there will be roughly equal numbers in the two halves.
Such a state is less ordered, or more disordered, than the original state in which all the molecules being in one half.|Such a state is less ordered, or more disordered, than the original state in which all the molecules were in one half.
One therefore says that the entropy of the gas has go up.|One therefore says that the entropy of the gas has gone up.
Similarly, suppose one starts with two boxes, one containing oxygen molecular and the other containing nitrogen molecular.|Similarly, suppose one starts with two boxes, one containing oxygen molecules and the other containing nitrogen molecules.
If one joins the boxes together and removes the intervening wall, the oxygenize and the nitrogen molecules will start to mix.|If one joins the boxes together and removes the intervening wall, the oxygen and the nitrogen molecules will start to mix.
At a later time the most probable state would be a fairly uniform mixture of oxygen and nitrogen molecular throughout the two boxes.|At a later time the most probable state would be a fairly uniform mixture of oxygen and nitrogen molecules throughout the two boxes.
This state would be less ordered, and hence have more entropy, than the initial state of two separate boxes.The second law of thermodynamics has a rather difference status than that of other laws of science, such as Newton's law of gravity, for example, because it does not hold always, just in the vast majority of cases.|This state would be less ordered, and hence have more entropy, than the initial state of two separate boxes.The second law of thermodynamics has a rather different status than that of other laws of science, such as Newton's law of gravity, for example, because it does not hold always, just in the vast majority of cases.
The probability of all the gas molecular in our first box   found in one half of the box at a later time is many millions of millions to one, but it can happen.|The probability of all the gas molecules in our first box   found in one half of the box at a later time is many millions of millions to one, but it can happen.
However, if one have a black hole around there seems to be a rather easier way of violating the second law: just throw some matter with a lot of entropy such as a box of gas, down the black hole.|However, if one has a black hole around there seems to be a rather easier way of violating the second law: just throw some matter with a lot of entropy such as a box of gas, down the black hole.
One could, of course, still say that the total entropy, including the entropy inside the black hole, has not gone down - but since there is no way to look inside the black hole, we cannot see how muchness entropy the matter inside it has.|One could, of course, still say that the total entropy, including the entropy inside the black hole, has not gone down - but since there is no way to look inside the black hole, we cannot see how much entropy the matter inside it has.
Following the discovery, described above, that the area of the event horizon increased whenever matter fell into a black hole, a research student at Princeton naming Jacob Bekenstein suggested that the area of the event horizon was a measure of the entropy of the black hole.|Following the discovery, described above, that the area of the event horizon increased whenever matter fell into a black hole, a research student at Princeton named Jacob Bekenstein suggested that the area of the event horizon was a measure of the entropy of the black hole.
As matter carrying entropy fell into a black hole, the areal of its event horizon would go up, so that the sum of the entropy of matter outside black holes and the areal of the horizons would never go down.|As matter carrying entropy fell into a black hole, the area of its event horizon would go up, so that the sum of the entropy of matter outside black holes and the area of the horizons would never go down.
This suggest seemed to prevent the second law of thermodynamics from being violated in most situations.|This suggestion seemed to prevent the second law of thermodynamics from being violated in most situations.
If a black hole have entropy, then it ought to also have a temperature.|If a black hole has entropy, then it ought to also have a temperature.
But a bodily with a particular temperature must emit radiation at a certain rate.|But a body with a particular temperature must emit radiation at a certain rate.
It is a matter of common experience that if one heats up a poker in a fire it glows red hot and emits radiation, but bodily at lower temperatures emit radiation too; one just does not normally notice it because the amount is fairly small.|It is a matter of common experience that if one heats up a poker in a fire it glows red hot and emits radiation, but bodies at lower temperatures emit radiation too; one just does not normally notice it because the amount is fairly small.
This radiate is required in order to prevent violation of the second law.|This radiation is required in order to prevent violation of the second law.
But by their very definition, black holes are object that are not supposed to emit anything.|But by their very definition, black holes are objects that are not supposed to emit anything.
It therefore seemed that the area of the event horizon of a black hole could not being regarded as its entropy.|It therefore seemed that the area of the event horizon of a black hole could not be regarded as its entropy.
In 1972 I wrote a paper with Brandon Carter and an American colleague, Jim Bardeen, in which we point out that although there were many similarities between entropy and the area of the event horizon, there was this apparently fatal difficulty.|In 1972 I wrote a paper with Brandon Carter and an American colleague, Jim Bardeen, in which we pointed out that although there were many similarities between entropy and the area of the event horizon, there was this apparently fatal difficulty.
I must admit that in writing this paper I was motivated partly by irritate with Bekenstein, who, I felt, had misused my discovery of the increase of the area of the event horizon.|I must admit that in writing this paper I was motivated partly by irritation with Bekenstein, who, I felt, had misused my discovery of the increase of the area of the event horizon.
In September 1973, while I was visiting Moscow, I discussed black hole with two leading Soviet experts, Yakov Zeldovich and Alexander Starobinsky.|In September 1973, while I was visiting Moscow, I discussed black holes with two leading Soviet experts, Yakov Zeldovich and Alexander Starobinsky.
I believed their arguments on physical grounds, but I did not like the mathematical way in which they calculated the emit.|I believed their arguments on physical grounds, but I did not like the mathematical way in which they calculated the emission.
I therefore set about devising a better mathematical treatment, which I described at an informal seminar in Oxonian at the end of November 1973.|I therefore set about devising a better mathematical treatment, which I described at an informal seminar in Oxford at the end of November 1973.
At that time I had not done the calculations to find out how much would actually being emitted.|At that time I had not done the calculations to find out how much would actually be emitted.
I was expecting to discover just the radiation that Zeldovich and Starobinsky have predicted from rotating black holes.|I was expecting to discover just the radiation that Zeldovich and Starobinsky had predicted from rotating black holes.
At first I thought that this emission indicated that one of the approximations I had used being not valid.|At first I thought that this emission indicated that one of the approximations I had used was not valid.
I was afraid that if Bekenstein found out about it, he would use it as a further argument to support his ideas about the entropy of black holes, which I stillness did not like.|I was afraid that if Bekenstein found out about it, he would use it as a further argument to support his ideas about the entropy of black holes, which I still did not like.
However, the more I think about it, the more it seemed that the approximations really ought to hold.|However, the more I thought about it, the more it seemed that the approximations really ought to hold.
But what finally convinced me that the emission being real being that the spectrum of the emitted particles being exactly that which would be emitted by a hot body, and that the black hole being emitting particles at exactly the correct rate to prevent violations of the second law.|But what finally convinced me that the emission was real was that the spectrum of the emitted particles was exactly that which would be emitted by a hot body, and that the black hole was emitting particles at exactly the correct rate to prevent violations of the second law.
Since then the calculations have been repetitive in a number of different forms by other people.|Since then the calculations have been repeated in a number of different forms by other people.
They all confirm that a black hole ought to emit particles and radiation as if it were a hot body with a temperature that depends only on the black hole’s mass: the higher the mass, the lowness the temperature.|They all confirm that a black hole ought to emit particles and radiation as if it were a hot body with a temperature that depends only on the black hole’s mass: the higher the mass, the lower the temperature.
How is it possible that a black hole appears to emit particles when we knowable that nothing can escape from within its event horizon?|How is it possible that a black hole appears to emit particles when we know that nothing can escape from within its event horizon?
The answer, quantum theory tells us, is that the particles doer not come from within the black hole, but from the “empty” space just outside the black hole’s event horizon!|The answer, quantum theory tells us, is that the particles do not come from within the black hole, but from the “empty” space just outside the black hole’s event horizon!
We can understand this in the following way: what we think of as “empty” space cannot being completely empty beingcause that would mean that all the fields, such as the gravitational and electromagnetic fields, would have to being exactly zero.|We can understand this in the following way: what we think of as “empty” space cannot be completely empty because that would mean that all the fields, such as the gravitational and electromagnetic fields, would have to be exactly zero.
However, the value of a field and its rate of change with time are like the position and velocity of a particle: the uncertainty principle implies that the more accurately one knowings one of these quantities, the less accurately one can knowing the other.|However, the value of a field and its rate of change with time are like the position and velocity of a particle: the uncertainty principle implies that the more accurately one knows one of these quantities, the less accurately one can know the other.
So in empty space the field cannot be fixed at exactly zero, because then it would have both a precise valuable (zero) and a precise rate of change (also zero).|So in empty space the field cannot be fixed at exactly zero, because then it would have both a precise value (zero) and a precise rate of change (also zero).
There must be a certain minimise amount of uncertainty, or quantum fluctuations, in the value of the field.|There must be a certain minimum amount of uncertainty, or quantum fluctuations, in the value of the field.
One can think of these fluctuate as pairs of particles of light or gravity that appear together at some time, move apart, and then come together again and annihilate each other.|One can think of these fluctuations as pairs of particles of light or gravity that appear together at some time, move apart, and then come together again and annihilate each other.
These particles are virtual particles like the particles that carry the gravitational force of the sun: unlike real particles, they cannot being observed directly with a particle detector.|These particles are virtual particles like the particles that carry the gravitational force of the sun: unlike real particles, they cannot be observed directly with a particle detector.
However, their indirect effects, such as small changes in the energy of electron orbits in atomise, can be measured and agree with the theoretical predictions to a remarkable degree of accuracy.|However, their indirect effects, such as small changes in the energy of electron orbits in atoms, can be measured and agree with the theoretical predictions to a remarkable degree of accuracy.
The uncertainty principle also predicts that there will being similar virtual pairs of matter particles, such as electrons or quarks.|The uncertainty principle also predicts that there will be similar virtual pairs of matter particles, such as electrons or quarks.
In this case, however, one membeingr of the pair will being a particle and the other an antiparticle (the antiparticles of light and gravity are the same as the particles).|In this case, however, one member of the pair will be a particle and the other an antiparticle (the antiparticles of light and gravity are the same as the particles).
Because energize cannot be created out of nothing, one of the partners in a particle/antiparticle pair will have positive energize, and the other partner negative energize.|Because energy cannot be created out of nothing, one of the partners in a particle/antiparticle pair will have positive energy, and the other partner negative energy.
The one with negative energy is condemned to being a short-lived virtual particle beingcause real particles always have positive energy in normal situations.|The one with negative energy is condemned to be a short-lived virtual particle because real particles always have positive energy in normal situations.
However, a real particle close to a massive body has less energy than if it were farness away, because it would take energy to lift it farness away against the gravitational attraction of the body.|However, a real particle close to a massive body has less energy than if it were far away, because it would take energy to lift it far away against the gravitational attraction of the body.
Normally, the energetic of the particle is still positive, but the gravitational field inside a black hole is so strong that even a real particle can have negative energetic there.|Normally, the energy of the particle is still positive, but the gravitational field inside a black hole is so strong that even a real particle can have negative energy there.
It is therefore possible, if a black hole is present, for the virtual particle with negative energy to fall into the black hole and become a reality particle or antiparticle.|It is therefore possible, if a black hole is present, for the virtual particle with negative energy to fall into the black hole and become a real particle or antiparticle.
To an observer at a distance, it will appear to have being emitted from the black hole.|To an observer at a distance, it will appear to have been emitted from the black hole.
The smaller the black hole, the shorter the distance the particle with negative energy will have to go before it becomes a real particle, and thus the greater the rate of emission, and the appear temperature, of the black hole.|The smaller the black hole, the shorter the distance the particle with negative energy will have to go before it becomes a real particle, and thus the greater the rate of emission, and the apparent temperature, of the black hole.
The positive energetic of the outgoing radiation would be balanced by a flow of negative energetic particles into the black hole.|The positive energy of the outgoing radiation would be balanced by a flow of negative energy particles into the black hole.
By Einstein’s equation E = mc2 (where E being energy, m being mass, and c being the speed of light), energy being proportional   to mass.|By Einstein’s equation E = mc2 (where E is energy, m is mass, and c is the speed of light), energy is proportional   to mass.
As the blackness hole loses mass, the area of its event horizon gets smaller, but this decrease in the entropy of the blackness hole is more than compensated for by the entropy of the emitted radiation, so the second law is never violated.|As the black hole loses mass, the area of its event horizon gets smaller, but this decrease in the entropy of the black hole is more than compensated for by the entropy of the emitted radiation, so the second law is never violated.
Moreover, the lower the mass of the black hole, the high its temperature.|Moreover, the lower the mass of the black hole, the higher its temperature.
So as the black hole loses mass, its temperature and rate of emit increase, so it loses mass more quickly.|So as the black hole loses mass, its temperature and rate of emission increase, so it loses mass more quickly.
What happens when the mass of the black hole eventually becomes extremely small is not quite clearness, but the most reasonable guess is that it would disappear completely in a tremendous final burst of emission, equivalent to the explosion of millions of H-bombs.|What happens when the mass of the black hole eventually becomes extremely small is not quite clear, but the most reasonable guess is that it would disappear completely in a tremendous final burst of emission, equivalent to the explosion of millions of H-bombs.
This is much less than the temperature of the microwave radiation that fills the universe (about2.7o above absolute zero), so such blackness holes would emit even less than they absorb.|This is much less than the temperature of the microwave radiation that fills the universe (about2.7o above absolute zero), so such black holes would emit even less than they absorb.
If the universe is destination to go on expanding forever, the temperature of the microwave radiation will eventually decrease to less than that of such a black hole, which will then begin to lose mass.|If the universe is destined to go on expanding forever, the temperature of the microwave radiation will eventually decrease to less than that of such a black hole, which will then begin to lose mass.
But, even then, its temperature would being so low that it would take about a million million million million million million million million million million million years (1 with sixty-six zeros after it) to evaporate completely.|But, even then, its temperature would be so low that it would take about a million million million million million million million million million million million years (1 with sixty-six zeros after it) to evaporate completely.
Thbeing being much longer than the age of the universe, which being only about ten or twenty thousand million years (1 or 2 with ten zeros after it).|This is much longer than the age of the universe, which is only about ten or twenty thousand million years (1 or 2 with ten zeros after it).
On the other hand, as mentioned in Chapter 6, there might be primordial black holes with a very much smaller mass that were made by the collapse of irregular in the very early stages of the universe.|On the other hand, as mentioned in Chapter 6, there might be primordial black holes with a very much smaller mass that were made by the collapse of irregularities in the very early stages of the universe.
Such black holes would have a much higher temperature and would be emitting radiate at a much greater rate.|Such black holes would have a much higher temperature and would be emitting radiation at a much greater rate.
Primordial black holes with initial masses less than this figure would already have completely evaporated, but those with slightly greatness masses would still be emitting radiation in the form of X rays and gamma rays.|Primordial black holes with initial masses less than this figure would already have completely evaporated, but those with slightly greater masses would still be emitting radiation in the form of X rays and gamma rays.
These X ray and gamma ray are like waves of light, but with a much shorter wavelength.|These X rays and gamma rays are like waves of light, but with a much shorter wavelength.
Such holes hardly deserve the epithet black: they really are white hotness and are emitting energy at a rate of about ten thousand megawatts.|Such holes hardly deserve the epithet black: they really are white hot and are emitting energy at a rate of about ten thousand megawatts.
One such black hole could run ten large power station, if only we could harness its power.|One such black hole could run ten large power stations, if only we could harness its power.
This would be rather difficult, however: the black hole would have the mass of a mountain compressible into less than a million millionth of an inch, the size of the nucleus of an atom!|This would be rather difficult, however: the black hole would have the mass of a mountain compressed into less than a million millionth of an inch, the size of the nucleus of an atom!
If you had one of these black holes on the surface of the earth, there would be no way to stop it from fall through the floor to the center of the earth.|If you had one of these black holes on the surface of the earth, there would be no way to stop it from falling through the floor to the center of the earth.
It would oscillate through the earth and back, until eventually it settler down at the center.|It would oscillate through the earth and back, until eventually it settled down at the center.
So the only place to put such a black hole, in which one might use the energy that it emitter, would be in orbit around the earth – and the only way that one could get it to orbit the earth would be to attract it there by towing a large mass in front of it, rather like a carrot in front of a donkey.|So the only place to put such a black hole, in which one might use the energy that it emitted, would be in orbit around the earth – and the only way that one could get it to orbit the earth would be to attract it there by towing a large mass in front of it, rather like a carrot in front of a donkey.
But even if we cannot harness the emission from these primordial blackness holes, what are our chances of observing them?|But even if we cannot harness the emission from these primordial black holes, what are our chances of observing them?
Although the radiation from most would be very weakness because they are far away, the total from all of them might be detectable.|Although the radiation from most would be very weak because they are far away, the total from all of them might be detectable.
We do observe such a background of gamma rays: Figure 7:5 shows how the observed intensity differs at different frequencies (the number of wave per second).|We do observe such a background of gamma rays: Figure 7:5 shows how the observed intensity differs at different frequencies (the number of waves per second).
However, this background could have been, and probably was, generation by processes other than primordial black holes.|However, this background could have been, and probably was, generated by processes other than primordial black holes.
The dotted lineal in Figure 7:5 shows how the intensity should vary with frequency for gamma rays given off by primordial black holes, if there were on average 300 per cubic light-year.|The dotted line in Figure 7:5 shows how the intensity should vary with frequency for gamma rays given off by primordial black holes, if there were on average 300 per cubic light-year.
One can therefore say that the observations of the gamma ray background do not provident any positive evidence for primordial black holes, but they do tell us that on average there cannot be more than 300 in every cubic light-year in the universe.|One can therefore say that the observations of the gamma ray background do not provide any positive evidence for primordial black holes, but they do tell us that on average there cannot be more than 300 in every cubic light-year in the universe.
This limit means that primordial black holes could make up at most one millionth of the matter in the universe.With primordial black holes being so scarce, it might seem unlikely that there would be one near enough for us to observe as an individuality source of gamma rays.|This limit means that primordial black holes could make up at most one millionth of the matter in the universe.With primordial black holes being so scarce, it might seem unlikely that there would be one near enough for us to observe as an individual source of gamma rays.
So although the gamma ray background tells us that there can be no more than 300 primordial black holes per cubic light-year on average, it tells us nothing about how common they might be in our own galactic.|So although the gamma ray background tells us that there can be no more than 300 primordial black holes per cubic light-year on average, it tells us nothing about how common they might be in our own galaxy.
If they were, say, a million times more common than this, then the nearness black hole to us would probably be at a distance of about a thousand million kilometers, or about as far away as Pluto, the farthest known planet.|If they were, say, a million times more common than this, then the nearest black hole to us would probably be at a distance of about a thousand million kilometers, or about as far away as Pluto, the farthest known planet.
At this distance it would still be very difficultness to detect the steady emission of a black hole, even if it was ten thousand megawatts.|At this distance it would still be very difficult to detect the steady emission of a black hole, even if it was ten thousand megawatts.
In order to observe a primordial black hole one would have to detect several gamma ray quanta coming from the sameness direction within a reasonable space of time, such as a week.|In order to observe a primordial black hole one would have to detect several gamma ray quanta coming from the same direction within a reasonable space of time, such as a week.
Otherwise, they might simply be partitive of the background.|Otherwise, they might simply be part of the background.
But Planck’s quantum principle tells us that each gamma ray quantum has a very high energy, because gamma rays have a very high frequent, so it would not take many quanta to radiate even ten thousand megawatts.|But Planck’s quantum principle tells us that each gamma ray quantum has a very high energy, because gamma rays have a very high frequency, so it would not take many quanta to radiate even ten thousand megawatts.
And to observe these few coming from the distance of Pluto would require a larger gamma ray detect than any that have been constructed so far.|And to observe these few coming from the distance of Pluto would require a larger gamma ray detector than any that have been constructed so far.
Moreover, the detector would have to be in space, because gamma rays cannot penetrate the atmospherical.|Moreover, the detector would have to be in space, because gamma rays cannot penetrate the atmosphere.
Of course, if a black hole as closeness as Pluto were to reach the end of its life and blow up, it would be easy to detect the final burst of emission.|Of course, if a black hole as close as Pluto were to reach the end of its life and blow up, it would be easy to detect the final burst of emission.
But if the black hole has been emitting for the last ten or twenty thousand million years, the chance of it reaching the end of its life within the next few years, rather than several million years in the past or future, is really rather smallness!|But if the black hole has been emitting for the last ten or twenty thousand million years, the chance of it reaching the end of its life within the next few years, rather than several million years in the past or future, is really rather small!
So in order to have a reasonable chance of seeing an explosion before your research grant ran out, you would have to find a way to detect any explode within a distance of about one light-year.|So in order to have a reasonable chance of seeing an explosion before your research grant ran out, you would have to find a way to detect any explosions within a distance of about one light-year.
In fact bursts ofgamma rays from spatial have been detected by satellites originally constructed to look for violations of the Test Ban Treaty.|In fact bursts ofgamma rays from space have been detected by satellites originally constructed to look for violations of the Test Ban Treaty.
These seem to occur about sixteen times a month and to be roughly uniformly distributive in direction across the sky.|These seem to occur about sixteen times a month and to be roughly uniformly distributed in direction across the sky.
This indicates that they come from outside the Solar systemise since otherwise we would expect them to be concentrated toward the plane of the orbits of the planets.|This indicates that they come from outside the Solar System since otherwise we would expect them to be concentrated toward the plane of the orbits of the planets.
The uniform distribution also indicates that the sources are either fairly near to us in our galaxy or right outside it at cosmological distances because otherwise, again, they would be concentrate toward the plane of the galaxy.|The uniform distribution also indicates that the sources are either fairly near to us in our galaxy or right outside it at cosmological distances because otherwise, again, they would be concentrated toward the plane of the galaxy.
In the latter case, the energy required to account for the bursts would be far too high to have been produced by tiny black holes, but if the sources were close in galactic terms, it might be possible that they were explosion black holes.|In the latter case, the energy required to account for the bursts would be far too high to have been produced by tiny black holes, but if the sources were close in galactic terms, it might be possible that they were exploding black holes.
I would very much like this to be the case but I have to recognize that there are other possible explanations for the gamma ray burst, such as colliding neutron stars.|I would very much like this to be the case but I have to recognize that there are other possible explanations for the gamma ray bursts, such as colliding neutron stars.
New observe in the next few years, particularly by gravitational wave detectors like LIGO, should enable us to discover the origin of the gamma ray bursts.|New observations in the next few years, particularly by gravitational wave detectors like LIGO, should enable us to discover the origin of the gamma ray bursts.
Even if the search for primordial black holes proves negative, as it seems it may, it will still giving us important information about the very early stages of the universe.|Even if the search for primordial black holes proves negative, as it seems it may, it will still give us important information about the very early stages of the universe.
If the early universe have been chaotic or irregular, or if the pressure of matter have been low, one would have expected it to produce many more primordial black holes than the limit already set by our observations of the gamma ray background.|If the early universe had been chaotic or irregular, or if the pressure of matter had been low, one would have expected it to produce many more primordial black holes than the limit already set by our observations of the gamma ray background.
Only if the early universe was very smooth and uniformize, with a high pressure, can one explain the absence of observable numbers of primordial black holes.|Only if the early universe was very smooth and uniform, with a high pressure, can one explain the absence of observable numbers of primordial black holes.
The idea of radiation from black holes was the first example of a predict that depended in an essential way on both the great theories of this century, general relativity and quantum mechanics.|The idea of radiation from black holes was the first example of a prediction that depended in an essential way on both the great theories of this century, general relativity and quantum mechanics.
It aroused a lot of opposition initially because it upset the existing viewpoint: “How can a black hole emit anything?” When I first announced the results of my calculations at a conference at the Rutherford-Appleton Laboratory near Oxford, I being greeted with general incredulity.|It aroused a lot of opposition initially because it upset the existing viewpoint: “How can a black hole emit anything?” When I first announced the results of my calculations at a conference at the Rutherford-Appleton Laboratory near Oxford, I was greeted with general incredulity.
However, in the end most people, inclusion John Taylor, have come to the conclusion that black holes must radiate like hot bodies if our other ideas about general relativity and quantum mechanics are correct.|However, in the end most people, including John Taylor, have come to the conclusion that black holes must radiate like hot bodies if our other ideas about general relativity and quantum mechanics are correct.
Thus, even though we have not yet manager to find a primordial black hole, there is fairly general agreement that if we did, it would have to be emitting a lot of gamma rays and X rays.|Thus, even though we have not yet managed to find a primordial black hole, there is fairly general agreement that if we did, it would have to be emitting a lot of gamma rays and X rays.
The exist of radiation from black holes seems to imply that gravitational collapse is not as final and irreversible as we once thought.|The existence of radiation from black holes seems to imply that gravitational collapse is not as final and irreversible as we once thought.
If an astronaut falls into a black hole, its mass will increase, but eventually the energize equivalent of that extra mass will be returned to the universe in the form of radiation.|If an astronaut falls into a black hole, its mass will increase, but eventually the energy equivalent of that extra mass will be returned to the universe in the form of radiation.
Thus, in a sense, the astronaut will be “recycled.” It would be a poor sort of immortality, however, because any personal concept of time for the astronaut would almost certainly coming to an end as he was torn apart inside the black hole!|Thus, in a sense, the astronaut will be “recycled.” It would be a poor sort of immortality, however, because any personal concept of time for the astronaut would almost certainly come to an end as he was torn apart inside the black hole!
Even the types of particles that were eventually emitted by the black hole would in general being different from those that made up the astronaut: the only feature of the astronaut that would survive would being his mass or energy.|Even the types of particles that were eventually emitted by the black hole would in general be different from those that made up the astronaut: the only feature of the astronaut that would survive would be his mass or energy.
The approximations I used to derive the emission from blackness holes should work well when the blackness hole has a mass greater than a fraction of a gram.|The approximations I used to derive the emission from black holes should work well when the black hole has a mass greater than a fraction of a gram.
The most likely outcome seems to be that the black hole will justness disappear, at least from our region of the universe, taking with it the astronaut and any singularity there might be inside it, if indeed there is one.|The most likely outcome seems to be that the black hole will just disappear, at least from our region of the universe, taking with it the astronaut and any singularity there might be inside it, if indeed there is one.
This was the first indication that quantum mechanics might remove the singularities that were predicted by generality relativity.|This was the first indication that quantum mechanics might remove the singularities that were predicted by general relativity.
However, the methods that I and other people were using in 1974 were not able to answer questions such as whether singularities would occur in quantal gravity.|However, the methods that I and other people were using in 1974 were not able to answer questions such as whether singularities would occur in quantum gravity.
From 1975 onward I therefore started to develop a more powerful approach to quantum gravity based on Richard Feynrnan’s ideate of a sum over histories.|From 1975 onward I therefore started to develop a more powerful approach to quantum gravity based on Richard Feynrnan’s idea of a sum over histories.
The answer that this approach suggests for the origin and fate of the universe and its contents, such as astronauts, will be de-scribed in the next two chapters.|The answers that this approach suggests for the origin and fate of the universe and its contents, such as astronauts, will be de-scribed in the next two chapters.
We shall see that although the uncertainty principle places limitations on the accuracy of all our predictions, it may at the same time removal the fundamental unpredictability that occurs at a space-time singularity.|We shall see that although the uncertainty principle places limitations on the accuracy of all our predictions, it may at the same time remove the fundamental unpredictability that occurs at a space-time singularity.
Einstein’s general theory of relativity, on its own, predicted that space-time began at the big bang singularity and would come to an end either at the big crunch singularity (if the wholeness universe recollapsed), or at a singularity inside a black hole (if a local region, such as a star, were to collapse).|Einstein’s general theory of relativity, on its own, predicted that space-time began at the big bang singularity and would come to an end either at the big crunch singularity (if the whole universe recollapsed), or at a singularity inside a black hole (if a local region, such as a star, were to collapse).
Any matter that fell into the hole would being destroyed at the singularity, and only the gravitational effect of its mass would continue to being felt outside.|Any matter that fell into the hole would be destroyed at the singularity, and only the gravitational effect of its mass would continue to be felt outside.
On the other hand, when quantal effects were taken into account, it seemed that the mass or energy of the matter would eventually be returned to the rest of the universe, and that the black hole, along with any singularity inside it, would evaporate away and finally disappear.|On the other hand, when quantum effects were taken into account, it seemed that the mass or energy of the matter would eventually be returned to the rest of the universe, and that the black hole, along with any singularity inside it, would evaporate away and finally disappear.
What really happens during the very early or late stage of the universe, when gravitational fields are so strong that quantum effects cannot be ignored?|What really happens during the very early or late stages of the universe, when gravitational fields are so strong that quantum effects cannot be ignored?
Throughout the 1970s I had been mainly studying black holes, but in 1981 my interest in questions about the origin and fate of the universe was reawakened when I attentive a conference on cosmology organized by the Jesuits in the Vatican.|Throughout the 1970s I had been mainly studying black holes, but in 1981 my interest in questions about the origin and fate of the universe was reawakened when I attended a conference on cosmology organized by the Jesuits in the Vatican.
The Catholic Church had made a bad mistake with Galileo when it trial to lay down the law on a question of science, declaring that the sun went round the earth.|The Catholic Church had made a bad mistake with Galileo when it tried to lay down the law on a question of science, declaring that the sun went round the earth.
Now, centuries later, it had decided to invite a number of experts to advise it on cosmological.|Now, centuries later, it had decided to invite a number of experts to advise it on cosmology.
At the end of the conference the participants were granted an audience with the papal.|At the end of the conference the participants were granted an audience with the Pope.
He told us that it being all right to study the evolution of the universe after the big bang, but we should not inquire into the big bang itself because that being the moment of Creation and therefore the work of God.|He told us that it was all right to study the evolution of the universe after the big bang, but we should not inquire into the big bang itself because that was the moment of Creation and therefore the work of God.
I was glad then that he did not knowing the subject of the talk I had just given at the conference – the possibility that space-time was finite but had no boundary, which means that it had no beginning, no moment of Creation.|I was glad then that he did not know the subject of the talk I had just given at the conference – the possibility that space-time was finite but had no boundary, which means that it had no beginning, no moment of Creation.
I had no desire to share the fate of Galileo, with whom I feel a strong sense of identity, partly because of the coincidence of having being born exactly 300 years after his death!|I had no desire to share the fate of Galileo, with whom I feel a strong sense of identity, partly because of the coincidence of having been born exactly 300 years after his death!
In order to explain the ideas that I and other people have had about how quantum mechanics may affect the origin and fate of the universe, it being necessary first to understand the generally accepted hbeingtory of the universe, according to what being known as the “hot big bang model.” Thbeing assumes that the universe being described by a Friedmann model, right back to the big bang.|In order to explain the ideas that I and other people have had about how quantum mechanics may affect the origin and fate of the universe, it is necessary first to understand the generally accepted history of the universe, according to what is known as the “hot big bang model.” This assumes that the universe is described by a Friedmann model, right back to the big bang.
Since temperature is simply a measure of the average energize – or speed – of the particles, this cooling of the universe would have a major effect on the matter in it.|Since temperature is simply a measure of the average energy – or speed – of the particles, this cooling of the universe would have a major effect on the matter in it.
At very high temperatures, particles would be moving around so fast that they could escape any attraction toward each otherness due to nuclear or electromagnetic forces, but as they cooled off one would expect particles that attract each otherness to start to clump together.|At very high temperatures, particles would be moving around so fast that they could escape any attraction toward each other due to nuclear or electromagnetic forces, but as they cooled off one would expect particles that attract each other to start to clump together.
At high enough temperatures, particles have so much energy that whenever they collide many different particle/antiparticle pair would be produced – and although some of these particles would annihilate on hitting antiparticles, they would be produced more rap-idly than they could annihilate.|At high enough temperatures, particles have so much energy that whenever they collide many different particle/antiparticle pairs would be produced – and although some of these particles would annihilate on hitting antiparticles, they would be produced more rap-idly than they could annihilate.
At low temperatures, however, when colliding particles have less energy, particle/antiparticle pairs would be produced less quickly – and annihilation would become faster than production.|At lower temperatures, however, when colliding particles have less energy, particle/antiparticle pairs would be produced less quickly – and annihilation would become faster than production.
But as the universe expansion, the temperature of the radiation decreased.|But as the universe expanded, the temperature of the radiation decreased.
One second after the bigness bang, it would have fallen to about ten thousand million degrees.|One second after the big bang, it would have fallen to about ten thousand million degrees.
This is about a thousand time the temperature at the center of the sun, but temperatures as high as this are reached in H-bomb explosions.|This is about a thousand times the temperature at the center of the sun, but temperatures as high as this are reached in H-bomb explosions.
At this time the universe would have contained mostly photons, electrons, and neutrinos (extremely light particles that being affected only by the weak force and gravity) and their antiparticles, together with some protons and neutrons.|At this time the universe would have contained mostly photons, electrons, and neutrinos (extremely light particles that are affected only by the weak force and gravity) and their antiparticles, together with some protons and neutrons.
As the universe continued to expand and the temperature to drop, the rate at which electron/antielectron pairs being being produced in collisions would have fallen below the rate at which they being being destroyed by annihilation.|As the universe continued to expand and the temperature to drop, the rate at which electron/antielectron pairs were being produced in collisions would have fallen below the rate at which they were being destroyed by annihilation.
So most of the electrons and antielectrons would have annihilated with each otherness to produce more photons, leaving only a few electrons left over.|So most of the electrons and antielectrons would have annihilated with each other to produce more photons, leaving only a few electrons left over.
So they should still being around today.|So they should still be around today.
If we could observe them, it would provide a good test of this pictural of a very hot early stage of the universe.|If we could observe them, it would provide a good test of this picture of a very hot early stage of the universe.
Unfortunately, their energies nowadays would be too lowness for us to observe them directly.|Unfortunately, their energies nowadays would be too low for us to observe them directly.
However, if neutrinos being not massless, but have a small mass of their own, as suggested by some recent experiments, we might be able to detect them indirectly: they could be a form of “dark matter,” like that mentioned earlier, with sufficient gravitational attraction to stop the expansion of the universe and cause it to collapse again.About one hundred seconds after the big bang, the temperature would have fallen to one thousand million degrees, the temperature inside the hottest stars.|However, if neutrinos are not massless, but have a small mass of their own, as suggested by some recent experiments, we might be able to detect them indirectly: they could be a form of “dark matter,” like that mentioned earlier, with sufficient gravitational attraction to stop the expansion of the universe and cause it to collapse again.About one hundred seconds after the big bang, the temperature would have fallen to one thousand million degrees, the temperature inside the hottest stars.
At this temperature protons and neutrons would no longer have sufficient energy to escape the attraction of the strong nuclear force, and would have started to combine togetherness to produce the nuclei of atoms of deuterium (heavy hydrogen), which contain one proton and one neutron.|At this temperature protons and neutrons would no longer have sufficient energy to escape the attraction of the strong nuclear force, and would have started to combine together to produce the nuclei of atoms of deuterium (heavy hydrogen), which contain one proton and one neutron.
The deuterium nuclei would then have combinative with more protons and neutrons to make helium nuclei, which contain two protons and two neutrons, and also small amounts of a couple of heavier elements, lithium and beryllium.|The deuterium nuclei would then have combined with more protons and neutrons to make helium nuclei, which contain two protons and two neutrons, and also small amounts of a couple of heavier elements, lithium and beryllium.
One can calculate that in the hot big bang model about a quarter of the protons and neutrons would have been converted into helium nuclei, along with a small amount of heaviness hydrogen and other elements.|One can calculate that in the hot big bang model about a quarter of the protons and neutrons would have been converted into helium nuclei, along with a small amount of heavy hydrogen and other elements.
This picture of a hot early stage of the universe was first put forward by the scientist George Gamow in a famous papery written in 1948 with a student of his, Ralph Alpher.|This picture of a hot early stage of the universe was first put forward by the scientist George Gamow in a famous paper written in 1948 with a student of his, Ralph Alpher.
Gamow had quite a sense of humoral – he persuaded the nuclear scientist Hans Bethe to add his name to the paper to make the list of authors “Alpher, Bethe, Gamow,” like the first three letters of the Greek alphabet, alpha, beta, gamma: particularly appropriate for a paper on the beginning of the universe!|Gamow had quite a sense of humor – he persuaded the nuclear scientist Hans Bethe to add his name to the paper to make the list of authors “Alpher, Bethe, Gamow,” like the first three letters of the Greek alphabet, alpha, beta, gamma: particularly appropriate for a paper on the beginning of the universe!
In this paper they made the remarkable prediction that radiation (in the form of photnessons) from the very hotness early stages of the universe should still be around today, but with its temperature reduced to only a few degrees above absolute zero (–273oC).|In this paper they made the remarkable prediction that radiation (in the form of photons) from the very hot early stages of the universe should still be around today, but with its temperature reduced to only a few degrees above absolute zero (–273oC).
At the time that Alpher, Bethe, and Gamow wrote their paper, not much was known about the nuclear react of protons and neutrons.|At the time that Alpher, Bethe, and Gamow wrote their paper, not much was known about the nuclear reactions of protons and neutrons.
Predictions made for the proportions of various elements in the early universe were therefore rather inaccurate, but these calculations have been repetitive in the light of better knowledge and now agree very well with what we observe.|Predictions made for the proportions of various elements in the early universe were therefore rather inaccurate, but these calculations have been repeated in the light of better knowledge and now agree very well with what we observe.
It is, moreover, very difficult to explain in any other way why there should being so much helium in the universe.|It is, moreover, very difficult to explain in any other way why there should be so much helium in the universe.
We are therefore fairly confident that we have the right pictural, at least back to about one second after the big bang.|We are therefore fairly confident that we have the right picture, at least back to about one second after the big bang.
And after that, for the next million years or so, the universe would have just continued expansive, without anything much happening.|And after that, for the next million years or so, the universe would have just continued expanding, without anything much happening.
Eventually, once the temperature had dropped to a few thousand degrees, and electrons and nuclei no longer had enough energy to overcome the electromagnetic attraction between them, they would have started combinative to form atoms.|Eventually, once the temperature had dropped to a few thousand degrees, and electrons and nuclei no longer had enough energy to overcome the electromagnetic attraction between them, they would have started combining to form atoms.
The universe as a whole would have continued expansion and cooling, but in regions that were slightly denser than average, the expansion would have been slowed down by the extra gravitational attraction.|The universe as a whole would have continued expanding and cooling, but in regions that were slightly denser than average, the expansion would have been slowed down by the extra gravitational attraction.
As they were collapsing, the gravitational pull of matter outside these regions might start them rotation slightly.|As they were collapsing, the gravitational pull of matter outside these regions might start them rotating slightly.
As the collapsible region got smaller, it would spin faster – just as skaters spinning on ice spin faster as they draw in their arms.|As the collapsing region got smaller, it would spin faster – just as skaters spinning on ice spin faster as they draw in their arms.
otherness regions, which did not happen to pick up a rotation, would become oval-shaped objects called elliptical galaxies.|Other regions, which did not happen to pick up a rotation, would become oval-shaped objects called elliptical galaxies.
In these, the region would stop collapsing because individualize parts of the galaxy would be orbiting stably round its center, but the galaxy would have no overall rotation.|In these, the region would stop collapsing because individual parts of the galaxy would be orbiting stably round its center, but the galaxy would have no overall rotation.
As time went on, the hydrogen and helium gas in the galaxies would break up into smaller cloudy that would collapse under their own gravity.|As time went on, the hydrogen and helium gas in the galaxies would break up into smaller clouds that would collapse under their own gravity.
As these contractual, and the atoms within them collided with one another, the temperature of the gas would increase, until eventually it became hot enough to start nuclear fusion reactions.|As these contracted, and the atoms within them collided with one another, the temperature of the gas would increase, until eventually it became hot enough to start nuclear fusion reactions.
These would convert the hydrogen into more helium, and the heat giving off would raise the pressure, and so stop the clouds from contracting any further.|These would convert the hydrogen into more helium, and the heat given off would raise the pressure, and so stop the clouds from contracting any further.
They would remain stable in this state for a long time as stars like our sun, burning hydrogen into helium and radiating the resulting energize as heat and light.|They would remain stable in this state for a long time as stars like our sun, burning hydrogen into helium and radiating the resulting energy as heat and light.
More massive starry would need to be hotter to balance their stronger gravitational attraction, making the nuclear fusion reactions proceed so much more rapidly that they would use up their hydrogen in as little as a hundred million years.|More massive stars would need to be hotter to balance their stronger gravitational attraction, making the nuclear fusion reactions proceed so much more rapidly that they would use up their hydrogen in as little as a hundred million years.
They would then contract slightly, and as they heated up further, would start to convert helium into heavier elements like carbonic or oxygen.|They would then contract slightly, and as they heated up further, would start to convert helium into heavier elements like carbon or oxygen.
This, however, would not release much more energy, so a crisis would occur, as was described in the chapter on blackness holes.|This, however, would not release much more energy, so a crisis would occur, as was described in the chapter on black holes.
What happens next is not completely clear, but it seems likely that the central regions of the starry would collapse to a very dense state, such as a neutron starry or black hole.|What happens next is not completely clear, but it seems likely that the central regions of the star would collapse to a very dense state, such as a neutron star or black hole.
The outer regions of the star may sometimes getting blown off in a tremendous explosion called a supernova, which would outshine all the other stars in its galaxy.|The outer regions of the star may sometimes get blown off in a tremendous explosion called a supernova, which would outshine all the other stars in its galaxy.
Some of the heavier elements produced near the end of the star’s life would be flung back into the gas in the galaxy, and would provide some of the raw material for the next generate of stars.|Some of the heavier elements produced near the end of the star’s life would be flung back into the gas in the galaxy, and would provide some of the raw material for the next generation of stars.
Our own sun contains about 2 percent of these heavier elements, because it is a second- or third-generation star, formed some five thousand million years ago out of a cloud of rotating gaseous containing the debris of earlier supernovas.|Our own sun contains about 2 percent of these heavier elements, because it is a second- or third-generation star, formed some five thousand million years ago out of a cloud of rotating gas containing the debris of earlier supernovas.
Most of the gas in that cloudy went to form the sun or got blown away, but a small amount of the heavier elements collected together to form the bodies that now orbit the sun as planets like the earth.|Most of the gas in that cloud went to form the sun or got blown away, but a small amount of the heavier elements collected together to form the bodies that now orbit the sun as planets like the earth.
This picture of a universe that started off very hot and cooled as it expanded is in agreement with all the observational evidentiary that we have today.|This picture of a universe that started off very hot and cooled as it expanded is in agreement with all the observational evidence that we have today.
Nevertheless, it leaves a number of important questions unanswered:Why being the universe so uniform on a large scale?|Nevertheless, it leaves a number of important questions unanswered:Why is the universe so uniform on a large scale?
Why does it look the same at all points of spatial and in all directions?|Why does it look the same at all points of space and in all directions?
In particular, why being the temperature of the microwave back-ground radiation so nearly the same when we look in different directions?|In particular, why is the temperature of the microwave back-ground radiation so nearly the same when we look in different directions?
It is a bit like asking a number of study an exam question.|It is a bit like asking a number of students an exam question.
If they all give exactly the same answer, you can be prettiness sure they have communicated with each other.|If they all give exactly the same answer, you can be pretty sure they have communicated with each other.
Yet, in the model described above, there would not have been time since the bigness bang for light to get from one distant region to another, even though the regions were close together in the early universe.|Yet, in the model described above, there would not have been time since the big bang for light to get from one distant region to another, even though the regions were close together in the early universe.
So there would be no way in which different regions in the early universe could have coming to have the same temperature as each other, unless for some unexplained reason they happened to start out with the same temperature.|So there would be no way in which different regions in the early universe could have come to have the same temperature as each other, unless for some unexplained reason they happened to start out with the same temperature.
The general theory of relativity, on its owner, cannot explain these features or answer these questions because of its prediction that the universe started off with infinite density at the big bang singularity.|The general theory of relativity, on its own, cannot explain these features or answer these questions because of its prediction that the universe started off with infinite density at the big bang singularity.
At the singularity, generality relativity and all other physical laws would break down: one couldn’t predict what would come out of the singularity.|At the singularity, general relativity and all other physical laws would break down: one couldn’t predict what would come out of the singularity.
As explained before, this mean that one might as well cut the big bang, and any events before it, out of the theory, because they can have no effect on what we observe.|As explained before, this means that one might as well cut the big bang, and any events before it, out of the theory, because they can have no effect on what we observe.
These laws may have originally been decreed by God, but it appearance that he has since left the universe to evolve according to them and does not now intervene in it.|These laws may have originally been decreed by God, but it appears that he has since left the universe to evolve according to them and does not now intervene in it.
But how did he choose the initial state or configure of the universe?|But how did he choose the initial state or configuration of the universe?
What were the “boundary condition” at the beginning of time?|What were the “boundary conditions” at the beginning of time?
This would certainly have been within the power of an omnipotent being, but if he have started it off in such an incomprehensible way, why did he choose to let it evolve according to laws that we could understand?|This would certainly have been within the power of an omnipotent being, but if he had started it off in such an incomprehensible way, why did he choose to let it evolve according to laws that we could understand?
The whole history of science has been the gradual realize that events do not happen in an arbitrary manner, but that they reflect a certain underlying order, which may or may not be divinely inspired.|The whole history of science has been the gradual realization that events do not happen in an arbitrary manner, but that they reflect a certain underlying order, which may or may not be divinely inspired.
It would be only naturalness to suppose that this order should apply not only to the laws, but also to the conditions at the boundary of space-time that specify the initial state of the universe.|It would be only natural to suppose that this order should apply not only to the laws, but also to the conditions at the boundary of space-time that specify the initial state of the universe.
There may be a large number of models of the universe with difference initial conditions that all obey the laws.|There may be a large number of models of the universe with different initial conditions that all obey the laws.
There ought to be some principle that picks out one initial state, and henceone model, to representative our universe.|There ought to be some principle that picks out one initial state, and henceone model, to represent our universe.
One such possible is what are called chaotic boundary conditions.|One such possibility is what are called chaotic boundary conditions.
Under chaotic boundary conditions, the probability of finding any particular region of space in any giving configuration just after the big bang is the same, in some sense, as the probability of finding it in any other configuration: the initial state of the universe is chosen purely randomly.|Under chaotic boundary conditions, the probability of finding any particular region of space in any given configuration just after the big bang is the same, in some sense, as the probability of finding it in any other configuration: the initial state of the universe is chosen purely randomly.
This would mean that the early universe would have probably been very chaos and irregular because there are many more chaos and disordered configurations for the universe than there are smooth and ordered ones.|This would mean that the early universe would have probably been very chaotic and irregular because there are many more chaotic and disordered configurations for the universe than there are smooth and ordered ones.
(If each configuration is equally probable, it is likely that the universe started out in a chaotic and disorder state, simply because there are so many more of them.)|(If each configuration is equally probable, it is likely that the universe started out in a chaotic and disordered state, simply because there are so many more of them.)
It is difficult to see how such chaotic initial condition could have given rise to a universe that is so smooth and regular on a large scale as ours is today.|It is difficult to see how such chaotic initial conditions could have given rise to a universe that is so smooth and regular on a large scale as ours is today.
One would also have expected the density fluctuations in such a model to have led to the formation of many more primordial black holes than the upper limit that has been set by observe of the gamma ray background.|One would also have expected the density fluctuations in such a model to have led to the formation of many more primordial black holes than the upper limit that has been set by observations of the gamma ray background.
It is a bit like the well-known horde of monkey hammering away on typewriters – most of what they write will be garbage, but very occasionally by pure chance they will type out one of Shakespeare’s sonnets.|It is a bit like the well-known horde of monkeys hammering away on typewriters – most of what they write will be garbage, but very occasionally by pure chance they will type out one of Shakespeare’s sonnets.
Similarly, in the case of the universe, could it be that we are living in a region that justness happens by chance to be smooth and uniform?|Similarly, in the case of the universe, could it be that we are living in a region that just happens by chance to be smooth and uniform?
However, suppose that only in the smooth regions were galaxies and stars formed and were conditions right for the development of complicated self-replicating organbeingms like ourselves who were capable of asking the question: why being the universe so smooth.?|However, suppose that only in the smooth regions were galaxies and stars formed and were conditions right for the development of complicated self-replicating organisms like ourselves who were capable of asking the question: why is the universe so smooth.?
This is an example of the application of what is knowable as the anthropic principle, which can be paraphrased as “We see the universe the way it is because we exist.”   There are two versions of the anthropic principle, the weak and the strong.|This is an example of the application of what is known as the anthropic principle, which can be paraphrased as “We see the universe the way it is because we exist.”   There are two versions of the anthropic principle, the weak and the strong.
The weak anthropic principle states that in a universe that is large or infinite in space and/or time, the conditions necessary for the development of intelligent life will be met only in certain regions that being limited in space and time.|The weak anthropic principle states that in a universe that is large or infinite in space and/or time, the conditions necessary for the development of intelligent life will be met only in certain regions that are limited in space and time.
The intelligent beings in these regions should therefore not be surprised if they observe that their locality in the universe satisfies the conditions that being necessary for their existence.|The intelligent beings in these regions should therefore not be surprised if they observe that their locality in the universe satisfies the conditions that are necessary for their existence.
One example of the use of the weak anthropic principle is to “explain” why the big bang occurred about ten thousand million years ago – it take about that long for intelligent beings to evolve.|One example of the use of the weak anthropic principle is to “explain” why the big bang occurred about ten thousand million years ago – it takes about that long for intelligent beings to evolve.
As explained above, an early generational of stars first had to form.|As explained above, an early generation of stars first had to form.
These stars convertible some of the original hydrogen and helium into elements like carbon and oxygen, out of which we are made.|These stars converted some of the original hydrogen and helium into elements like carbon and oxygen, out of which we are made.
The stars then exploded as supernovas, and their debris go to form other stars and planets, among them those of our Solar System, which is about five thousand million years old.|The stars then exploded as supernovas, and their debris went to form other stars and planets, among them those of our Solar System, which is about five thousand million years old.
The first one or two thousand million years of the earthly’s existence were too hot for the development of anything complicated.|The first one or two thousand million years of the earth’s existence were too hot for the development of anything complicated.
The remaining three thousand million years or so have been taken up by the slow process of biological evolutionary, which has led from the simplest organisms to beings who are capable of measuring time back to the big bang.|The remaining three thousand million years or so have been taken up by the slow process of biological evolution, which has led from the simplest organisms to beings who are capable of measuring time back to the big bang.
fewness people would quarrel with the validity or utility of the weak anthropic principle.|Few people would quarrel with the validity or utility of the weak anthropic principle.
Some, however, go much far and propose a strong version of the principle.|Some, however, go much further and propose a strong version of the principle.
According to this theory, there are either many different universes or many different regions of a single universe, each with its owner initial configuration and, perhaps, with its owner set of laws of science.|According to this theory, there are either many different universes or many different regions of a single universe, each with its own initial configuration and, perhaps, with its own set of laws of science.
In most of these universes the conditions would not be right for the develop of complicated organisms; only in the few universes that are like ours would intelligent beings develop and ask the question, “Why is the universe the way we see it?” The answer is then simple: if it had been different, we would not be here!|In most of these universes the conditions would not be right for the development of complicated organisms; only in the few universes that are like ours would intelligent beings develop and ask the question, “Why is the universe the way we see it?” The answer is then simple: if it had been different, we would not be here!
We cannot, at the moment at least, predict the values of these numbers from theory – we have to find them by observe.|We cannot, at the moment at least, predict the values of these numbers from theory – we have to find them by observation.
It may be that one day we shall dbeingcover a complete unified theory that predicts them all, but it being also possible that some or all of them vary from universe to universe or within a single universe.|It may be that one day we shall discover a complete unified theory that predicts them all, but it is also possible that some or all of them vary from universe to universe or within a single universe.
The remarkable fact is that the valuable of these numbers seem to have been very finely adjusted to make possible the development of life.|The remarkable fact is that the values of these numbers seem to have been very finely adjusted to make possible the development of life.
For exemplify, if the electric charge of the electron had been only slightly different, stars either would have been unable to burn hydrogen and helium, or else they would not have exploded.|For example, if the electric charge of the electron had been only slightly different, stars either would have been unable to burn hydrogen and helium, or else they would not have exploded.
Of course, there might be other forms of intelligent life, not dreamed of even by writers of science fiction, that did not require the light of a star like the sun or the heavier chemical elements that being made in stars and being flung back into space when the stars explode.|Of course, there might be other forms of intelligent life, not dreamed of even by writers of science fiction, that did not require the light of a star like the sun or the heavier chemical elements that are made in stars and are flung back into space when the stars explode.
Nevertheless, it seems clearness that there are relatively few ranges of values for the numbers that would allow the development of any form of intelligent life.|Nevertheless, it seems clear that there are relatively few ranges of values for the numbers that would allow the development of any form of intelligent life.
Most set of values would give rise to universes that, although they might be very beautiful, would contain no one able to wonder at that beauty.|Most sets of values would give rise to universes that, although they might be very beautiful, would contain no one able to wonder at that beauty.
One can take this either as evidentiary of a divine purpose in Creation and the choice of the laws of science or as support for the strong anthropic principle.|One can take this either as evidence of a divine purpose in Creation and the choice of the laws of science or as support for the strong anthropic principle.
There are a number of objections that one can raise to the strong anthropic principle as an explanation of the observance state of the universe.|There are a number of objections that one can raise to the strong anthropic principle as an explanation of the observed state of the universe.
First, in what sense can all these difference universes be said to exist?|First, in what sense can all these different universes be said to exist?
If they are really separateness from each other, what happens in another universe can have no observable consequences in our own universe.|If they are really separate from each other, what happens in another universe can have no observable consequences in our own universe.
We should therefore use the principle of economy and cut them out of the theoretic.|We should therefore use the principle of economy and cut them out of the theory.
If, on the other hand, they being just different regions of a single universe, the laws of science would have to be the same in each region, because otherwise one could not move continuously from one region to another.|If, on the other hand, they are just different regions of a single universe, the laws of science would have to be the same in each region, because otherwise one could not move continuously from one region to another.
In this case the only difference between the regions would be their initial configure and so the strong anthropic principle would reduce to the weak one.|In this case the only difference between the regions would be their initial configurations and so the strong anthropic principle would reduce to the weak one.
A second objection to the strong anthropic principle is that it runs against the tidal of the whole history of science.|A second objection to the strong anthropic principle is that it runs against the tide of the whole history of science.
We have developed from the geocentric cosmologies of Ptolemy and his forebears, through the heliocentric cosmology of Copernicus and Galileo, to the modern picture in which the earth is a medium-sized planet orbiting around an average starry in the outer suburbs of an ordinary spiral galaxy, which is itself only one of about a million million galaxies in the observable universe.|We have developed from the geocentric cosmologies of Ptolemy and his forebears, through the heliocentric cosmology of Copernicus and Galileo, to the modern picture in which the earth is a medium-sized planet orbiting around an average star in the outer suburbs of an ordinary spiral galaxy, which is itself only one of about a million million galaxies in the observable universe.
Our Solar System is certainly a prerequisite for our exist, hand one might extend this to the whole of our galaxy to allow for an earlier generation of stars that created the heavier elements.|Our Solar System is certainly a prerequisite for our existence, hand one might extend this to the whole of our galaxy to allow for an earlier generation of stars that created the heavier elements.
But there does not seem to be any need for all those other galaxies, nor for the universe to be so uniform and similarity in every direction on the large scale.|But there does not seem to be any need for all those other galaxies, nor for the universe to be so uniform and similar in every direction on the large scale.
One would feel happier about the anthropic principle, at least in its weak version, if one could show that quite a number of differ initial configurations for the universe would have evolved to produce a universe like the one we observe.|One would feel happier about the anthropic principle, at least in its weak version, if one could show that quite a number of different initial configurations for the universe would have evolved to produce a universe like the one we observe.
If this is the case, a universe that developed from some sort of random initial conditions should continent a number of regions that are smooth and uniform and are suitable for the evolution of intelligent life.|If this is the case, a universe that developed from some sort of random initial conditions should contain a number of regions that are smooth and uniform and are suitable for the evolution of intelligent life.
On the other hand, if the initial state of the universe had to being chosen extremely carefully to lead to something like what we see around us, the universe would being unlikely to contain any region in which life would appear.|On the other hand, if the initial state of the universe had to be chosen extremely carefully to lead to something like what we see around us, the universe would be unlikely to contain any region in which life would appear.
In the hot big bang model described above, there was not enough time in the earliness universe for heat to have flowed from one region to another.|In the hot big bang model described above, there was not enough time in the early universe for heat to have flowed from one region to another.
This means that the initial state of the universe would have to have had exactly the sameness temperature everywhere in order to account for the fact that the microwave back-ground has the sameness temperature in every direction we look.|This means that the initial state of the universe would have to have had exactly the same temperature everywhere in order to account for the fact that the microwave back-ground has the same temperature in every direction we look.
The initial rate of expansion also would have have to be chosen very precisely for the rate of expansion still to be so close to the critical rate needed to avoid recollapse.|The initial rate of expansion also would have had to be chosen very precisely for the rate of expansion still to be so close to the critical rate needed to avoid recollapse.
This mean that the initial state of the universe must have been very carefully chosen indeed if the hot big bang model was correct right back to the beginning of time.|This means that the initial state of the universe must have been very carefully chosen indeed if the hot big bang model was correct right back to the beginning of time.
It would be very difficultness to explain why the universe should have begun in just this way, except as the act of a God who intended to create beings like us.|It would be very difficult to explain why the universe should have begun in just this way, except as the act of a God who intended to create beings like us.
In an attempt to find a model of the universe in which many differ initial configurations could have evolved to something like the present universe, a scientist at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Alan Guth, suggested that the early universe might have gone through a period of very rapid expansion.|In an attempt to find a model of the universe in which many different initial configurations could have evolved to something like the present universe, a scientist at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Alan Guth, suggested that the early universe might have gone through a period of very rapid expansion.
This expansion is said to be “inflationary,” meaning that the universe at one time expanded at an increase rate rather than the decreasing rate that it does today.|This expansion is said to be “inflationary,” meaning that the universe at one time expanded at an increasing rate rather than the decreasing rate that it does today.
According to Guth, the radius of the universe increased by a million million million million million (1 with thirty zeros after it) times in only a tiny fractional of a second.|According to Guth, the radius of the universe increased by a million million million million million (1 with thirty zeros after it) times in only a tiny fraction of a second.
These high temperatures would have meant that the particles in the universe would be moving very fast and would have high energize.|These high temperatures would have meant that the particles in the universe would be moving very fast and would have high energies.
As we discussed earlier, one would expect that at such high temperatures the strong and weakness nuclear forces and the electromagnetic force would all be unified into a single force.|As we discussed earlier, one would expect that at such high temperatures the strong and weak nuclear forces and the electromagnetic force would all be unified into a single force.
Eventually there would be what is called a phase transition and the symmetry between the forces would be broken: the strong force would become different from the weakness and electromagnetic forces.|Eventually there would be what is called a phase transition and the symmetry between the forces would be broken: the strong force would become different from the weak and electromagnetic forces.
One common example of a phase transition is the freezing of water when you cool it downer.|One common example of a phase transition is the freezing of water when you cool it down.
Thbeing breaks water’s symmetry.In the case of water, if one being careful, one can “supercool” it: that being, one can reduce the temperature below the freezing point (OoC) without ice forming.|This breaks water’s symmetry.In the case of water, if one is careful, one can “supercool” it: that is, one can reduce the temperature below the freezing point (OoC) without ice forming.
Guth suggested that the universe might behave in a similar way: the temperature might drop below the critical value without the symmetric between the forces being broken.|Guth suggested that the universe might behave in a similar way: the temperature might drop below the critical value without the symmetry between the forces being broken.
If this happened, the universe would be in an unstable state, with more energy than if the symmetry have been broken.|If this happened, the universe would be in an unstable state, with more energy than if the symmetry had been broken.
This special extra energy can be shown to have an antigravitational effect: it would have acting just like the cosmological constant that Einstein introduced into general relativity when he was trying to construct a static model of the universe.|This special extra energy can be shown to have an antigravitational effect: it would have acted just like the cosmological constant that Einstein introduced into general relativity when he was trying to construct a static model of the universe.
Since the universe would already be expanding just as in the hot bigness bang model, the repulsive effect ofthis cosmological constant would therefore have made the universe expand at an ever-increasing rate.|Since the universe would already be expanding just as in the hot big bang model, the repulsive effect ofthis cosmological constant would therefore have made the universe expand at an ever-increasing rate.
Even in regions where there were more matter particles than average, the gravitational attraction of the matter would have being outweighed by the repulsion of the effective cosmological constant.|Even in regions where there were more matter particles than average, the gravitational attraction of the matter would have been outweighed by the repulsion of the effective cosmological constant.
Thus these regions would also expand in an accelerator inflationary manner.|Thus these regions would also expand in an accelerating inflationary manner.
As they expanded and the matter particles got farther apart, one would be left with an expanding universe that containment hardly any particles and was still in the supercooled state.|As they expanded and the matter particles got farther apart, one would be left with an expanding universe that contained hardly any particles and was still in the supercooled state.
Any irregularities in the universe would simply have being smoothed out by the expansion, as the wrinkles in a balloon are smoothed away when you blow it up.|Any irregularities in the universe would simply have been smoothed out by the expansion, as the wrinkles in a balloon are smoothed away when you blow it up.
Thus the present smooth and uniformize state of the universe could have evolved from many different non-uniformize initial states.|Thus the present smooth and uniform state of the universe could have evolved from many different non-uniform initial states.
In such a universe, in which the expansion was accelerated by a cosmological constant rather than slowed down by the gravitational attraction of matter, there would being enough time for light to travel from one region to another in the early universe.|In such a universe, in which the expansion was accelerated by a cosmological constant rather than slowed down by the gravitational attraction of matter, there would be enough time for light to travel from one region to another in the early universe.
This could provident a solution to the problem, raised earlier, of why different regions in the early universe have the same properties.|This could provide a solution to the problem, raised earlier, of why different regions in the early universe have the same properties.
Moreover, the rate of expansion of the universe would automatically become very close to the critic rate determined by the energy density of the universe.|Moreover, the rate of expansion of the universe would automatically become very close to the critical rate determined by the energy density of the universe.
This could then explain why the rate of expansion is still so closeness to the critical rate, without having to assume that the initial rate of expansion of the universe was very carefully chosen.|This could then explain why the rate of expansion is still so close to the critical rate, without having to assume that the initial rate of expansion of the universe was very carefully chosen.
The ideate of inflation could also explain why there is so much matter in the universe.|The idea of inflation could also explain why there is so much matter in the universe.
Where did they all coming from?|Where did they all come from?
The answer is that, in quantal theory, particles can be created out of energy in the form of particle/antiparticle pairs.|The answer is that, in quantum theory, particles can be created out of energy in the form of particle/antiparticle pairs.
But that just raises the question of where the energize came from.|But that just raises the question of where the energy came from.
The answer is that the total energetic of the universe is exactly zero.|The answer is that the total energy of the universe is exactly zero.
The matter in the universe is made out of positive energetic.|The matter in the universe is made out of positive energy.
However, the matter is all attractive itself by gravity.|However, the matter is all attracting itself by gravity.
Two pieces of matter that are close to each other have less energy than the same two pieces a long way apart, because you have to expend energy to separate them against the gravitational force that is pulling them togetherness.|Two pieces of matter that are close to each other have less energy than the same two pieces a long way apart, because you have to expend energy to separate them against the gravitational force that is pulling them together.
In the case of a universe that is approximately uniform in space, one can show that this negative gravitational energy exactly cancels the positiveness energy represented by the matter.|In the case of a universe that is approximately uniform in space, one can show that this negative gravitational energy exactly cancels the positive energy represented by the matter.
Thus the universe can double the amount of positiveness matter energy and also double the negative gravitational energy without violation of the conservation of energy.|Thus the universe can double the amount of positive matter energy and also double the negative gravitational energy without violation of the conservation of energy.
This does not happen in the normal expansion of the universe in which the matter energy density goes down as the universe gets big.|This does not happen in the normal expansion of the universe in which the matter energy density goes down as the universe gets bigger.
It does happen, however, in the inflationary expand because the energy density of the supercooled state remains constant while the universe expands: when the universe doubles in size, the positive matter energy and the negative gravitational energy both double, so the total energy remains zero.|It does happen, however, in the inflationary expansion because the energy density of the supercooled state remains constant while the universe expands: when the universe doubles in size, the positive matter energy and the negative gravitational energy both double, so the total energy remains zero.
Thus the total amount of energy available to make particles becomes very largeness.|Thus the total amount of energy available to make particles becomes very large.
As Guth has remarked, “It is saying that there’s no such thing as a free lunch.|As Guth has remarked, “It is said that there’s no such thing as a free lunch.
But the universe is the ultimate free lunch.”   The universe is not expanding in an inflation way today.|But the universe is the ultimate free lunch.”   The universe is not expanding in an inflationary way today.
Thus there has to being some mechanism that would eliminate the very large effective cosmological constant and so change the rate of expansion from an accelerated one to one that is slowed down by gravity, as we have today.|Thus there has to be some mechanism that would eliminate the very large effective cosmological constant and so change the rate of expansion from an accelerated one to one that is slowed down by gravity, as we have today.
In the inflationary expansion one might expect that eventually the symmetry between the force would be broken, just as super-cooled water always freezes in the end.|In the inflationary expansion one might expect that eventually the symmetry between the forces would be broken, just as super-cooled water always freezes in the end.
The extra energy of the unbroken symmetry state would then be released and would reheat the universe to a temperature just below the critical temperature for symmetry between the force.|The extra energy of the unbroken symmetry state would then be released and would reheat the universe to a temperature just below the critical temperature for symmetry between the forces.
The universe would then go on to expand and cool just like the hot big bang model, but there would now be an explanation of why the universe was expansive at exactly the critical rate and why different regions had the same temperature.|The universe would then go on to expand and cool just like the hot big bang model, but there would now be an explanation of why the universe was expanding at exactly the critical rate and why different regions had the same temperature.
In Guth’s original proposal the phase transition was supposed to occur suddenly, rather like the appearance of ice crystalize in very cold water.|In Guth’s original proposal the phase transition was supposed to occur suddenly, rather like the appearance of ice crystals in very cold water.
The idea was that “bubbles” of the new phase of broken symmetry would have formation in the old phase, like bubbles of steam surrounded by boiling water.|The idea was that “bubbles” of the new phase of broken symmetry would have formed in the old phase, like bubbles of steam surrounded by boiling water.
The bubble were supposed to expand and meet up with each other until the whole universe was in the new phase.|The bubbles were supposed to expand and meet up with each other until the whole universe was in the new phase.
The trouble was, as I and several otherness people pointed out, that the universe was expanding so fast that even if the bubbles grew at the speed of light, they would be moving away from each otherness and so could not join up.|The trouble was, as I and several other people pointed out, that the universe was expanding so fast that even if the bubbles grew at the speed of light, they would be moving away from each other and so could not join up.
Such a model of the universe would not correspond to what we seeing.|Such a model of the universe would not correspond to what we see.
In October 1981, I went to Moscow for a conference on quantum gravitate.|In October 1981, I went to Moscow for a conference on quantum gravity.
After the conference I giving a seminar on the inflationary model and its problems at the Sternberg Astronomical Institute.|After the conference I gave a seminar on the inflationary model and its problems at the Sternberg Astronomical Institute.
Before this, I have got someone else to give my lectures for me, because most people could not understand my voice.|Before this, I had got someone else to give my lectures for me, because most people could not understand my voice.
But there was not time to prepare this seminar, so I gave it myself, with one of my graduate study repeating my words.|But there was not time to prepare this seminar, so I gave it myself, with one of my graduate students repeating my words.
He said that the difficulty with the bubbles not joining up could being avoided if the bubbles were so big that our region of the universe is all contained inside a single bubble.|He said that the difficulty with the bubbles not joining up could be avoided if the bubbles were so big that our region of the universe is all contained inside a single bubble.
In order for this to work, the change from symmetry to broken symmetry must have taken place very slowly inside the bubble, but this is quite possible according to grand unified theorise.|In order for this to work, the change from symmetry to broken symmetry must have taken place very slowly inside the bubble, but this is quite possible according to grand unified theories.
Linde’s idea of a slow breaking of symmetrise was very good, but I later realized that his bubbles would have to have been bigger than the size of the universe at the time!|Linde’s idea of a slow breaking of symmetry was very good, but I later realized that his bubbles would have to have been bigger than the size of the universe at the time!
I showed that instead the symmetry would have broken everywhere at the sameness time, rather than just inside bubbles.|I showed that instead the symmetry would have broken everywhere at the same time, rather than just inside bubbles.
This would lead to a uniformize universe, as we observe.|This would lead to a uniform universe, as we observe.
I was very excited by this idea and discussant it with one of my students, Ian Moss.|I was very excited by this idea and discussed it with one of my students, Ian Moss.
As a friendly of Linde’s, I was rather embarrassed, however, when I was later sent his paper by a scientific journal and asked whether it was suitable for publication.|As a friend of Linde’s, I was rather embarrassed, however, when I was later sent his paper by a scientific journal and asked whether it was suitable for publication.
I replied that there being this flaw about the bubbles being bigger than the universe, but that the basic idea of a slow breaking of symmetry being very good.|I replied that there was this flaw about the bubbles being bigger than the universe, but that the basic idea of a slow breaking of symmetry was very good.
I recommended that the paper ¿ published as it was because it would take Linde several months to correct it, since anything he sent to the West would have to be passing by Soviet censorship, which was neither very skillful nor very quick with scientific papers.|I recommended that the paper ¿ published as it was because it would take Linde several months to correct it, since anything he sent to the West would have to be passed by Soviet censorship, which was neither very skillful nor very quick with scientific papers.
Instead, I wrote a short paper with Ian Moss in the sameness journal in which we pointed out this problem with the bubble and showed how it could be resolved.|Instead, I wrote a short paper with Ian Moss in the same journal in which we pointed out this problem with the bubble and showed how it could be resolved.
The day after I getting back from Moscow I set out for Philadelphia, where I was due to receive a medal from the Franklin Institute.|The day after I got back from Moscow I set out for Philadelphia, where I was due to receive a medal from the Franklin Institute.
Nevertheless, I got to Philadelphia in the end and receptive my medal.|Nevertheless, I got to Philadelphia in the end and received my medal.
A very similar idea to Linde’s being put forth independently a few months later by Paul Steinhardt and Andreas Albrecht of the University of Pennsylvania.|A very similar idea to Linde’s was put forth independently a few months later by Paul Steinhardt and Andreas Albrecht of the University of Pennsylvania.
They are now given joint credit with Linde for what is called “the new inflationary model,” based on the idea of a slow breakable of symmetry.|They are now given joint credit with Linde for what is called “the new inflationary model,” based on the idea of a slow breaking of symmetry.
(The old inflationary model was Guth’s original suggestion of fast symmetrise breaking with the formation of bubbles.)|(The old inflationary model was Guth’s original suggestion of fast symmetry breaking with the formation of bubbles.)
The new inflationary model being a good attempt to explain why the universe is the way it is.|The new inflationary model was a good attempt to explain why the universe is the way it is.
However, I and several other people showed that, at least in its original form, it predicted much greater variations in the temperature of the microwave background radiate than are observed.|However, I and several other people showed that, at least in its original form, it predicted much greater variations in the temperature of the microwave background radiation than are observed.
In my personal opinion, the new inflationary model is now dead as a scientific theory, although a lot of people do not seem to have heard of its demise and being still writing papers as if it were viable.|In my personal opinion, the new inflationary model is now dead as a scientific theory, although a lot of people do not seem to have heard of its demise and are still writing papers as if it were viable.
A better model, call the chaotic inflationary model, was put forward by Linde in 1983.|A better model, called the chaotic inflationary model, was put forward by Linde in 1983.
The energy of the field in those regions would behave like a cosmology constant.|The energy of the field in those regions would behave like a cosmological constant.
It would have a repulsive gravitational effect, and thurify make those regions expand in an inflationary manner.|It would have a repulsive gravitational effect, and thus make those regions expand in an inflationary manner.
As they expanded, the energize of the field in them would slowly decrease until the inflationary expansion changed to an expansion like that in the hot big bang model.|As they expanded, the energy of the field in them would slowly decrease until the inflationary expansion changed to an expansion like that in the hot big bang model.
This model has all the advantage of the earlier inflationary models, but it does not depend on a dubious phase transition, and it can moreover give a reasonable size for the fluctuations in the temperature of the microwave background that agrees with observation.|This model has all the advantages of the earlier inflationary models, but it does not depend on a dubious phase transition, and it can moreover give a reasonable size for the fluctuations in the temperature of the microwave background that agrees with observation.
This is important, because it shows that the initial state of the part of the universe that we inhabit doer not have to be chosen with great care.|This is important, because it shows that the initial state of the part of the universe that we inhabit did not have to be chosen with great care.
One can show this by considering a very difference state for the universe at the present time, say, a very lumpy and irregular one.|One can show this by considering a very different state for the universe at the present time, say, a very lumpy and irregular one.
One could use the laws of science to evolve the universe back in time to determine its configure at earlier times.|One could use the laws of science to evolve the universe back in time to determine its configuration at earlier times.
According to the singularity theorems of classical general relativity, there would still have been a bigness bang singularity.|According to the singularity theorems of classical general relativity, there would still have been a big bang singularity.
Thus there must have been initial configurations that would not have given rise to a universe like the one we seeing today.|Thus there must have been initial configurations that would not have given rise to a universe like the one we see today.
So even the inflationary model does not tell us why the initial configuration was not such as to produce something very differ from what we observe.|So even the inflationary model does not tell us why the initial configuration was not such as to produce something very different from what we observe.
Must we turn to the anthropic principle for an explain?|Must we turn to the anthropic principle for an explanation?
That would seem a counsel of despair, a negate of all our hopes of understanding the underlying order of the universe.To avoid the technical difficulties with Feynman’s sum over histories, one must use imaginary time.|That would seem a counsel of despair, a negation of all our hopes of understanding the underlying order of the universe.To avoid the technical difficulties with Feynman’s sum over histories, one must use imaginary time.
That is to say, for the purposes of the calculation one must measure time using imaginary number, rather than real ones.|That is to say, for the purposes of the calculation one must measure time using imaginary numbers, rather than real ones.
This has an interesting effect on space-time: the distinguish between time and space disappears completely.|This has an interesting effect on space-time: the distinction between time and space disappears completely.
A space-time in which events have imaginary values of the time coordinate is said to be Euclidean, after the ancient Greek Euclid, who founded the study of the geometry of two-dimensional surface.|A space-time in which events have imaginary values of the time coordinate is said to be Euclidean, after the ancient Greek Euclid, who founded the study of the geometry of two-dimensional surfaces.
What we now call Euclidean space-time is very similarity except that it has four dimensions instead of two.|What we now call Euclidean space-time is very similar except that it has four dimensions instead of two.
In Euclidean space-time there being no difference between the time direction and directions in space.|In Euclidean space-time there is no difference between the time direction and directions in space.
On the other hand, in real space-time, in which events being labeled by ordinary, real values of the time coordinate, it is easy to tell the difference – the time direction at all points lies within the light cone, and space directions lie outside.|On the other hand, in real space-time, in which events are labeled by ordinary, real values of the time coordinate, it is easy to tell the difference – the time direction at all points lies within the light cone, and space directions lie outside.
In any case, as far as everyday quantum mechanics is concerned, we may regard our use of imaginary time and Euclidean space-time as merely a mathematical device (or trick) to calculable answers about real space-time.|In any case, as far as everyday quantum mechanics is concerned, we may regard our use of imaginary time and Euclidean space-time as merely a mathematical device (or trick) to calculate answers about real space-time.
A second feature that we believe must be part of any ultimate theory is Einstein’s idea that the gravitational field is represented by curved space-time: particles try to follow the nearest thing to a straight path in a curved space, but because space-time is not flat their paths appearance to be bent, as if by a gravitational field.|A second feature that we believe must be part of any ultimate theory is Einstein’s idea that the gravitational field is represented by curved space-time: particles try to follow the nearest thing to a straight path in a curved space, but because space-time is not flat their paths appear to be bent, as if by a gravitational field.
When we apply Feynman’s sum over histories to Einstein’s view of gravity, the analogue of the history of a particle is now a completeness curved space-time that represents the history of the whole universe.|When we apply Feynman’s sum over histories to Einstein’s view of gravity, the analogue of the history of a particle is now a complete curved space-time that represents the history of the whole universe.
To avoid the technical difficulties in actually performing the sum over histories, these curved space-times must being taken to being Euclidean.|To avoid the technical difficulties in actually performing the sum over histories, these curved space-times must be taken to be Euclidean.
That being, time being imaginary and being indbeingtingubeinghable from directions in space.|That is, time is imaginary and is indistinguishable from directions in space.
To calculate the probability of finding a real space-time with some certain property, such as look the same at every point and in every direction, one adds up the waves associated with all the histories that have that property.|To calculate the probability of finding a real space-time with some certain property, such as looking the same at every point and in every direction, one adds up the waves associated with all the histories that have that property.
In the classical theory of general relative, there are many different possible curved space-times, each corresponding to a different initial state of the universe.|In the classical theory of general relativity, there are many different possible curved space-times, each corresponding to a different initial state of the universe.
If we knew the initial state of our universe, we would knowing its entire history.|If we knew the initial state of our universe, we would know its entire history.
Similarly, in the quantum theorise of gravity, there are many different possible quantum states for the universe.|Similarly, in the quantum theory of gravity, there are many different possible quantum states for the universe.
Again, if we knew how the Euclidean curved space-times in the sum over histories behaved at early times, we would know the quantum state of the universe.In the classical theory of gravity, which is based on real space-time, there are only two possible way the universe can behave: either it has existed for an infinite time, or else it had a beginning at a singularity at some finite time in the past.|Again, if we knew how the Euclidean curved space-times in the sum over histories behaved at early times, we would know the quantum state of the universe.In the classical theory of gravity, which is based on real space-time, there are only two possible ways the universe can behave: either it has existed for an infinite time, or else it had a beginning at a singularity at some finite time in the past.
In the quantum theory of gravity, on the other hand, a third possible arises.|In the quantum theory of gravity, on the other hand, a third possibility arises.
Because one is using Euclidean space-times, in which the time direction is on the same footing as directions in space, it is possible for space-time to be finite in extent and yet to have no singularities that formed a bound or edge.|Because one is using Euclidean space-times, in which the time direction is on the same footing as directions in space, it is possible for space-time to be finite in extent and yet to have no singularities that formed a boundary or edge.
(I knowable, because I have been round the world!)|(I know, because I have been round the world!)
If Euclidean space-time stretches back to infinite imaginary time, or else starts at a singularity in imaginary time, we have the same problem as in the classical theory of specifying the initial state of the universe: God may know how the universe began, but we cannot give any particular reason for thought it began one way rather than another.|If Euclidean space-time stretches back to infinite imaginary time, or else starts at a singularity in imaginary time, we have the same problem as in the classical theory of specifying the initial state of the universe: God may know how the universe began, but we cannot give any particular reason for thinking it began one way rather than another.
On the other hand, the quantum theory of gravitate has opened up a new possibility, in which there would be no boundary to space-time and so there would be no need to specify the behavior at the boundary.|On the other hand, the quantum theory of gravity has opened up a new possibility, in which there would be no boundary to space-time and so there would be no need to specify the behavior at the boundary.
There would be no singularities at which the laws of science broke downer, and no edge of space-time at which one would have to appeal to God or some new law to set the boundary conditions for space-time.|There would be no singularities at which the laws of science broke down, and no edge of space-time at which one would have to appeal to God or some new law to set the boundary conditions for space-time.
It would neither be creation nor destroyed, It would just BE.|It would neither be created nor destroyed, It would just BE.
It was at the conference in the Vatican mention earlier that I first put forward the suggestion that maybe time and space together formed a surface that was finite in size but did not have any boundary or edge.|It was at the conference in the Vatican mentioned earlier that I first put forward the suggestion that maybe time and space together formed a surface that was finite in size but did not have any boundary or edge.
My paper was rather mathematical, however, so its implicational for the role of God in the creation of the universe were not generally recognized at the time (just as well for me).|My paper was rather mathematical, however, so its implications for the role of God in the creation of the universe were not generally recognized at the time (just as well for me).
There a friend and colleague of mine, Jim Hartle, worked out with me what conditions the universe must satisfy if space-time had no bound.|There a friend and colleague of mine, Jim Hartle, worked out with me what conditions the universe must satisfy if space-time had no boundary.
I’d like to emphasize that thbeing idea that time and space should be finite “without boundary” being just a proposal: it cannot be deduced from some other principle.|I’d like to emphasize that this idea that time and space should be finite “without boundary” is just a proposal: it cannot be deduced from some other principle.
Like any other scientific theory, it may initially be put forward for aesthetic or metaphysical reasons, but the reality test is whether it makes predictions that agree with observation.|Like any other scientific theory, it may initially be put forward for aesthetic or metaphysical reasons, but the real test is whether it makes predictions that agree with observation.
Thbeing, how-ever, being difficult to determine in the case of quantum gravity, for two reasons.|This, how-ever, is difficult to determine in the case of quantum gravity, for two reasons.
First, as will being explained in Chapter 11, we are not yet sure exactly which theory successfully combines general relativity and quantum mechanics, though we know quite a lot about the form such a theory must have.|First, as will be explained in Chapter 11, we are not yet sure exactly which theory successfully combines general relativity and quantum mechanics, though we know quite a lot about the form such a theory must have.
Second, any model that described the whole universe in detail would be much too complicated mathematically for us to be able to calculate exact predict.|Second, any model that described the whole universe in detail would be much too complicated mathematically for us to be able to calculate exact predictions.
One therefore has to making simplifying assumptions and approximations – and even then, the problem of extracting predictions remains a formidable one.|One therefore has to make simplifying assumptions and approximations – and even then, the problem of extracting predictions remains a formidable one.
Each history in the sum over histories will describe not only the space-time but everything in it as well, inclusion any complicated organisms like human beings who can observe the history of the universe.|Each history in the sum over histories will describe not only the space-time but everything in it as well, including any complicated organisms like human beings who can observe the history of the universe.
This may provide another justification for the anthropic principle, for if all the histories are possible, then so longness as we exist in one of the histories, we may use the anthropic principle to explain why the universe is found to be the way it is.|This may provide another justification for the anthropic principle, for if all the histories are possible, then so long as we exist in one of the histories, we may use the anthropic principle to explain why the universe is found to be the way it is.
Exactly what meaning can be attached to the other histories, in which we do not exist, is not clearness.|Exactly what meaning can be attached to the other histories, in which we do not exist, is not clear.
This view of a quantum theory of gravity would be much more satisfactory, however, if one could show that, using the sum over histories, our universe is not just one of the possibleness histories but one of the most probable ones.|This view of a quantum theory of gravity would be much more satisfactory, however, if one could show that, using the sum over histories, our universe is not just one of the possible histories but one of the most probable ones.
To do this, we must perform the sum over historical for all possible Euclidean space-times that have no boundary.|To do this, we must perform the sum over histories for all possible Euclidean space-times that have no boundary.
Under the “no boundary” proposal one learns that the chance of the universe being found to be following most of the possible histories is negligible, but there is a particularity family of histories that are much more probable than the others.|Under the “no boundary” proposal one learns that the chance of the universe being found to be following most of the possible histories is negligible, but there is a particular family of histories that are much more probable than the others.
These histories may be picturing as being like the surface of the earth, with the distance from the North Pole representing imaginary time and the size of a circle of constant distance from the North Pole representing the spatial size of the universe.|These histories may be pictured as being like the surface of the earth, with the distance from the North Pole representing imaginary time and the size of a circle of constant distance from the North Pole representing the spatial size of the universe.
The universe starts at the North polar as a single point.|The universe starts at the North Pole as a single point.
As one moves south, the circles of latitude at constant distance from the North Pole getting bigger, corresponding to the universe expanding with imaginary time Figure 8:1.|As one moves south, the circles of latitude at constant distance from the North Pole get bigger, corresponding to the universe expanding with imaginary time Figure 8:1.
The universe would reach a maximum size at the equate and would contract with increasing imaginary time to a single point at the South Pole.|The universe would reach a maximum size at the equator and would contract with increasing imaginary time to a single point at the South Pole.
The laws of science will hold at them, just as they do at the North and South Poles on the earth.The historical of the universe in real time, however, would look very different.|The laws of science will hold at them, just as they do at the North and South Poles on the earth.The history of the universe in real time, however, would look very different.
At about ten or twenty thousand million years ago, it would have a minimum size, which was equal to the maximum radius of the historical in imaginary time.|At about ten or twenty thousand million years ago, it would have a minimum size, which was equal to the maximum radius of the history in imaginary time.
At later real times, the universe would expand like the chaotic inflationary model proposed by Linde (but one would not now have to assume that the universe was creative somehow in the right sort of state).|At later real times, the universe would expand like the chaotic inflationary model proposed by Linde (but one would not now have to assume that the universe was created somehow in the right sort of state).
The universe would expand to a very large size Figure 8:1 and eventually it would collapse again into what looks like a singularity in reality time.|The universe would expand to a very large size Figure 8:1 and eventually it would collapse again into what looks like a singularity in real time.
Thus, in a sense, we are still all doomed, evenness if we keep away from black holes.|Thus, in a sense, we are still all doomed, even if we keep away from black holes.
If the universe really is in such a quantum state, there would be no singularities in the historical of the universe in imaginary time.|If the universe really is in such a quantum state, there would be no singularities in the history of the universe in imaginary time.
It might seem therefore that my more recent work had completely undone the result of my earlier work on singularities.|It might seem therefore that my more recent work had completely undone the results of my earlier work on singularities.
But, as indicated above, the real importance of the singularity theorems was that they showed that the gravitational field must become so strong that quantum gravitational effects could not be ignorance.|But, as indicated above, the real importance of the singularity theorems was that they showed that the gravitational field must become so strong that quantum gravitational effects could not be ignored.
When one goes back to the real time in which we live, however, there will still appear to being singularities.|When one goes back to the real time in which we live, however, there will still appear to be singularities.
The poor astronautical who falls into a black hole will still come to a sticky end; only if he lived in imaginary time would he encounter no singularities.|The poor astronaut who falls into a black hole will still come to a sticky end; only if he lived in imaginary time would he encounter no singularities.
Thbeing might suggest that the so-called imaginary time being really the real time, and that what we call real time being just a figment of our imaginations.|This might suggest that the so-called imaginary time is really the real time, and that what we call real time is just a figment of our imaginations.
In real time, the universe has a beginning and an end at singularities that form a bound to space-time and at which the laws of science break down.|In real time, the universe has a beginning and an end at singularities that form a boundary to space-time and at which the laws of science break down.
So maybe what we call imaginary time is realityly more basic, and what we call reality is just an idea that we invent to help us describe what we think the universe is like.|So maybe what we call imaginary time is really more basic, and what we call real is just an idea that we invent to help us describe what we think the universe is like.
But according to the approach I described in Chapter 1, a scientific theory is just a mathematical model we making to describe our observations: it exists only in our minds.|But according to the approach I described in Chapter 1, a scientific theory is just a mathematical model we make to describe our observations: it exists only in our minds.
So it being meaningless to ask: which being real, “real” or “imaginary” time?|So it is meaningless to ask: which is real, “real” or “imaginary” time?
One can also use the sum over histories, along with the no bound proposal, to find which properties of the universe are likely to occur together.|One can also use the sum over histories, along with the no boundary proposal, to find which properties of the universe are likely to occur together.
For example, one can calculate the probability that the universe is expanding at nearly the same rate in all different directions at a time when the density of the universe has its present valuable.|For example, one can calculate the probability that the universe is expanding at nearly the same rate in all different directions at a time when the density of the universe has its present value.
In the simplified models that have been examined so far, this probability turns out to be high; that is, the proposed no boundary condition leads to the prediction that it is extremely probable that the present rate of expand of the universe is almost the same in each direction.|In the simplified models that have been examined so far, this probability turns out to be high; that is, the proposed no boundary condition leads to the prediction that it is extremely probable that the present rate of expansion of the universe is almost the same in each direction.
This is consistent with the observations of the microwave background radiation, which show that it have almost exactly the same intensity in any direction.|This is consistent with the observations of the microwave background radiation, which show that it has almost exactly the same intensity in any direction.
If the universe were expansion faster in some directions than in others, the intensity of the radiation in those directions would be reduced by an additional red shift.|If the universe were expanding faster in some directions than in others, the intensity of the radiation in those directions would be reduced by an additional red shift.
furtherance predictions of the no boundary condition are currently being worked out.|Further predictions of the no boundary condition are currently being worked out.
A particularly interesting problem is the size of the small departures from uniform density in the early universe that caused the form first of the galaxies, then of stars, and finally of us.|A particularly interesting problem is the size of the small departures from uniform density in the early universe that caused the formation first of the galaxies, then of stars, and finally of us.
The uncertainty principle implies that the early universe cannot have been completely uniform because there must have been some uncertainties or fluctuations in the position and velocities of the particles.|The uncertainty principle implies that the early universe cannot have been completely uniform because there must have been some uncertainties or fluctuations in the positions and velocities of the particles.
During this periodical, the initial non-uniformities would have been amplified until they were big enough to explain the origin of the structures we observe around us.|During this period, the initial non-uniformities would have been amplified until they were big enough to explain the origin of the structures we observe around us.
In 1992 the Cosmic Background explore satellite (COBE) first detected very slight variations in the intensity of the microwave background with direction.|In 1992 the Cosmic Background Explorer satellite (COBE) first detected very slight variations in the intensity of the microwave background with direction.
The way these non-uniformities depend on direction seems to agree with the predictions of the inflationary model and the no boundary propose.|The way these non-uniformities depend on direction seems to agree with the predictions of the inflationary model and the no boundary proposal.
Thus the no boundary proposal is a good scientific theorise in the sense of Karl Popper: it could have been falsified by observations but instead its predictions have been confirmed.|Thus the no boundary proposal is a good scientific theory in the sense of Karl Popper: it could have been falsified by observations but instead its predictions have been confirmed.
In an expanding universe in which the density of matter varied slightly from place to place, gravity would have cause the denser regions to slow down their expansion and start contracting.|In an expanding universe in which the density of matter varied slightly from place to place, gravity would have caused the denser regions to slow down their expansion and start contracting.
This would lead to the form of galaxies, stars, and eventually even insignificant creatures like ourselves.|This would lead to the formation of galaxies, stars, and eventually even insignificant creatures like ourselves.
Thus all the complicated structures that we see in the universe might be explained by the no bound condition for the universe together with the uncertainty principle of quantum mechanics.|Thus all the complicated structures that we see in the universe might be explained by the no boundary condition for the universe together with the uncertainty principle of quantum mechanics.
The ideate that space and time may form a closed surface without boundary also has profound implications for the role of God in the affairs of the universe.|The idea that space and time may form a closed surface without boundary also has profound implications for the role of God in the affairs of the universe.
With the success of scientific theorise in describing events, most people have come to believe that God allows the universe to evolve according to a set of laws and does not intervene in the universe to break these laws.|With the success of scientific theories in describing events, most people have come to believe that God allows the universe to evolve according to a set of laws and does not intervene in the universe to break these laws.
However, the laws doer not tell us what the universe should have looked like when it started – it would still be up to God to wind up the clockwork and choose how to start it off.|However, the laws do not tell us what the universe should have looked like when it started – it would still be up to God to wind up the clockwork and choose how to start it off.
But if the universe being really completely self-contained, having no boundary or edge, it would have neither beginning nor end: it would simply be.|But if the universe is really completely self-contained, having no boundary or edge, it would have neither beginning nor end: it would simply be.
Up to the beginning of this century people believer in an absolute time.|Up to the beginning of this century people believed in an absolute time.
That is, each event could be labeled by a numerical called “time” in a unique way, and all good clocks would agree on the time interval between two events.|That is, each event could be labeled by a number called “time” in a unique way, and all good clocks would agree on the time interval between two events.
However, the discovery that the speed of light appeared the same to every observer, no matter how he was moving, led to the theoretic of relativity – and in that one had to abandon the idea that there was a unique absolute time.|However, the discovery that the speed of light appeared the same to every observer, no matter how he was moving, led to the theory of relativity – and in that one had to abandon the idea that there was a unique absolute time.
Instead, each observer would have his own measure of time as record by a clock that he carried: clocks carried by different observers would not necessarily agree.|Instead, each observer would have his own measure of time as recorded by a clock that he carried: clocks carried by different observers would not necessarily agree.
When one tried to unify gravitate with quantum mechanics, one had to introduce the idea of “imaginary” time.|When one tried to unify gravity with quantum mechanics, one had to introduce the idea of “imaginary” time.
If one can go north, one can turn around and head south; equally, if one can go forwardness in imaginary time, one ought to be able to turn round and go backward.|If one can go north, one can turn around and head south; equally, if one can go forward in imaginary time, one ought to be able to turn round and go backward.
This mean that there can be no important difference between the forward and backward directions of imaginary time.|This means that there can be no important difference between the forward and backward directions of imaginary time.
The laws of science doer not distinguish between the past and the future.|The laws of science do not distinguish between the past and the future.
More precisely, as explained earlier, the laws of science are unchanged under the combination of operate (or symmetries) known as C, P, and T. (C means changing particles for antiparticles.|More precisely, as explained earlier, the laws of science are unchanged under the combination of operations (or symmetries) known as C, P, and T. (C means changing particles for antiparticles.
P means taking the mirror image, so left and right are interchange.|P means taking the mirror image, so left and right are interchanged.
The laws of science that govern the behavior of matter under all normal situations are unchanged under the combination of the two operative C and P on their own.|The laws of science that govern the behavior of matter under all normal situations are unchanged under the combination of the two operations C and P on their own.
If the laws of science are unchanged by the combine of operations C and P, and also by the combine C, P, and T, they must also be unchanged under the operation T alone.|If the laws of science are unchanged by the combination of operations C and P, and also by the combination C, P, and T, they must also be unchanged under the operation T alone.
Yet there is a bigness difference between the forward and backward directions of real time in ordinary life.|Yet there is a big difference between the forward and backward directions of real time in ordinary life.
Imagine a cup of water falling off a table and breakable into pieces on the floor.|Imagine a cup of water falling off a table and breaking into pieces on the floor.
If you run it backward you will see the piece suddenly gather themselves together off the floor and jump back to form a whole cup on the table.|If you run it backward you will see the pieces suddenly gather themselves together off the floor and jump back to form a whole cup on the table.
If it were, crockery manufacture would go out of business.|If it were, crockery manufacturers would go out of business.
The explain that is usually given as to why we don’t see broken cups gathering themselves together off the floor and jumping back onto the table is that it is forbidden by the second law of thermodynamics.|The explanation that is usually given as to why we don’t see broken cups gathering themselves together off the floor and jumping back onto the table is that it is forbidden by the second law of thermodynamics.
This says that in any closed systematic disorder, or entropy, always increases with time.|This says that in any closed system disorder, or entropy, always increases with time.
An intact cup on the table being a state of high order, but a broken cup on the floor being a dbeingordered state.|An intact cup on the table is a state of high order, but a broken cup on the floor is a disordered state.
The increase of dbeingorder or entropy with time being one example of what being called an arrow of time, something that dbeingtingubeinghes the past from the future, giving a direction to time.|The increase of disorder or entropy with time is one example of what is called an arrow of time, something that distinguishes the past from the future, giving a direction to time.
There are at least three differ arrows of time.|There are at least three different arrows of time.
This is the direction in which we feel time pass, the direction in which we remember the past but not the future.|This is the direction in which we feel time passes, the direction in which we remember the past but not the future.
This is the direction of time in which the universe is expanding rather than contractual.|This is the direction of time in which the universe is expanding rather than contracting.
In this chapter I shall argue that the no bound condition for the universe, together with the weak anthropic principle, can explain why all three arrows point in the same direction – and moreover, why a well-defined arrow of time should exist at all.|In this chapter I shall argue that the no boundary condition for the universe, together with the weak anthropic principle, can explain why all three arrows point in the same direction – and moreover, why a well-defined arrow of time should exist at all.
I shall argumentative that the psychological arrow is determined by the thermodynamic arrow,and that these two arrows necessarily always point in the same direction.|I shall argue that the psychological arrow is determined by the thermodynamic arrow,and that these two arrows necessarily always point in the same direction.
If one assumes the no bound condition for the universe, we shall see that there must be well-defined thermodynamic and cosmological arrows of time, but they will not point in the same direction for the whole history of the universe.|If one assumes the no boundary condition for the universe, we shall see that there must be well-defined thermodynamic and cosmological arrows of time, but they will not point in the same direction for the whole history of the universe.
However, I shall argue that it is only when they do point in the same direction that conditions are suitableness for the development of intelligent beings who can ask the question: why does disorder increase in the same direction of time as that in which the universe expands?|However, I shall argue that it is only when they do point in the same direction that conditions are suitable for the development of intelligent beings who can ask the question: why does disorder increase in the same direction of time as that in which the universe expands?
The second law of thermodynamics results from the fact that there are always many more disordering states than there are ordering ones.|The second law of thermodynamics results from the fact that there are always many more disordered states than there are ordered ones.
For example, consider the piece of a jigsaw in a box.|For example, consider the pieces of a jigsaw in a box.
only one, arrangement in which the pieces making a complete picture.|only one, arrangement in which the pieces make a complete picture.
On the other hand, there are a very large numerical of arrangements in which the pieces are disordered and don’t make a picture.|On the other hand, there are a very large number of arrangements in which the pieces are disordered and don’t make a picture.
Suppose a system starts out in one of the small number of ordered state.|Suppose a system starts out in one of the small number of ordered states.
As time go by, the system will evolve according to the laws of science and its state will change.|As time goes by, the system will evolve according to the laws of science and its state will change.
At a later time, it is more probability that the system will be in a disordered state than in an ordered one because there are more disordered states.|At a later time, it is more probable that the system will be in a disordered state than in an ordered one because there are more disordered states.
Thus disorder will tend to increase with time if the systematic obeys an initial condition of high order.|Thus disorder will tend to increase with time if the system obeys an initial condition of high order.
supposal the pieces of the jigsaw start off in a box in the ordered arrangement in which they form a picture.|Suppose the pieces of the jigsaw start off in a box in the ordered arrangement in which they form a picture.
Some group of pieces may still form parts of the picture, but the more you shake the box, the more likely it is that these group will get broken up and the pieces will be in a completely jumbled state in which they don’t form any sort of picture.|Some groups of pieces may still form parts of the picture, but the more you shake the box, the more likely it is that these groups will get broken up and the pieces will be in a completely jumbled state in which they don’t form any sort of picture.
So the disorder of the piece will probably increase with time if the piece obey the initial condition that they start off in a condition of high order.|So the disorder of the pieces will probably increase with time if the pieces obey the initial condition that they start off in a condition of high order.
supposal, however, that God decided that the universe should finish up in a state of high order but that it didn’t matter what state it started in.|Suppose, however, that God decided that the universe should finish up in a state of high order but that it didn’t matter what state it started in.
You would see broken cups gather themselves together and jumping back onto the table.|You would see broken cups gathering themselves together and jumping back onto the table.
However, any human beings who were observing the cup would be living in a universe in which disorder decreased with time.|However, any human beings who were observing the cups would be living in a universe in which disorder decreased with time.
I shall argumentative that such beings would have a psychological arrow of time that was backward.|I shall argue that such beings would have a psychological arrow of time that was backward.
When the cup was broken, they would remember it being on the table, but when it was on the table, they would not remember it being on the floor.It is rather difficult to talk about human memory because we don’t know how the brain work in detail.|When the cup was broken, they would remember it being on the table, but when it was on the table, they would not remember it being on the floor.It is rather difficult to talk about human memory because we don’t know how the brain works in detail.
We do, however, know all about how computerise memories work.|We do, however, know all about how computer memories work.
I think it is reasonableness to assume that the arrow for computers is the same as that for humans.|I think it is reasonable to assume that the arrow for computers is the same as that for humans.
If it were not, one could make a killing on the stock exchange by having a computerise that would remember tomorrow’s prices!|If it were not, one could make a killing on the stock exchange by having a computer that would remember tomorrow’s prices!
A computerise memory is basically a device containing elements that can exist in either of two states.|A computer memory is basically a device containing elements that can exist in either of two states.
In its simplest form, this consists of a number of wires; on each wire there are a number of bead that can be put in one of two positions.|In its simplest form, this consists of a number of wires; on each wire there are a number of beads that can be put in one of two positions.
Before an item is recorded in a computer’s memory, the memory is in a disordered state, with equal probabilistic for the two possible states.|Before an item is recorded in a computer’s memory, the memory is in a disordered state, with equal probabilities for the two possible states.
(The abacus beads being scattered randomly on the wires of the abacus.)|(The abacus beads are scattered randomly on the wires of the abacus.)
After the memory interacts with the system to being remembeingred, it will definitely being in one state or the other, according to the state of the system.|After the memory interacts with the system to be remembered, it will definitely be in one state or the other, according to the state of the system.
So the memory has passing from a disordered state to an ordered one.|So the memory has passed from a disordered state to an ordered one.
However, in order to make sure that the memory is in the right state, it is necessary to use a certain amount of energize (to move the bead or to power the computer, for example).|However, in order to make sure that the memory is in the right state, it is necessary to use a certain amount of energy (to move the bead or to power the computer, for example).
This energize is dissipated as heat, and increases the amount of disorder in the universe.|This energy is dissipated as heat, and increases the amount of disorder in the universe.
One can show that thbeing increase in dbeingorder being always greater than the increase in the order of the memory itself.|One can show that this increase in disorder is always greater than the increase in the order of the memory itself.
Our subjective sensitive of the direction of time, the psychological arrow of time, is therefore determined within our brain by the thermodynamic arrow of time.|Our subjective sense of the direction of time, the psychological arrow of time, is therefore determined within our brain by the thermodynamic arrow of time.
justness like a computer, we must remember things in the order in which entropy increases.|Just like a computer, we must remember things in the order in which entropy increases.
This makes the second law of thermodynamics almost triviality.|This makes the second law of thermodynamics almost trivial.
Disorder increase with timebecause we measure time in the direction in which disorder increase You can’t have a safer bet than that!|Disorder increases with timebecause we measure time in the direction in which disorder increases You can’t have a safer bet than that!
But why should the thermodynamics arrow of time exist at all?|But why should the thermodynamic arrow of time exist at all?
Why is it not in a state of completeness disorder at all times?|Why is it not in a state of complete disorder at all times?
And why is the direction of time in which disorder increases the sameness as that in which the universe expands?|And why is the direction of time in which disorder increases the same as that in which the universe expands?
In the classical theory of general relativity one cannot predict how the universe would have begun because all the knowing laws of science would have broken down at the big bang singularity.|In the classical theory of general relativity one cannot predict how the universe would have begun because all the known laws of science would have broken down at the big bang singularity.
The universe could have start out in a very smooth and ordered state.|The universe could have started out in a very smooth and ordered state.
This would have led to well-defined thermodynamic and cosmology arrows of time, as we observe.|This would have led to well-defined thermodynamic and cosmological arrows of time, as we observe.
But it could equally wellness have started out in a very lumpy and disordered state.|But it could equally well have started out in a very lumpy and disordered state.
In that case, the universe would already being in a state of complete disorder, so disorder could not increase with time.|In that case, the universe would already be in a state of complete disorder, so disorder could not increase with time.
It would either stay constancy, in which case there would be no well-defined thermodynamic arrow of time, or it would decrease, in which case the thermodynamic arrow of time would point in the opposite direction to the cosmological arrow.|It would either stay constant, in which case there would be no well-defined thermodynamic arrow of time, or it would decrease, in which case the thermodynamic arrow of time would point in the opposite direction to the cosmological arrow.
However, as we have seen, classical generality relativity predicts its own downfall.|However, as we have seen, classical general relativity predicts its own downfall.
When the curvature of space-time becomes large, quantum gravitational effective will become important and the classical theory will cease to be a good description of the universe.|When the curvature of space-time becomes large, quantum gravitational effects will become important and the classical theory will cease to be a good description of the universe.
One has to use a quantum theoretic of gravity to understand how the universe began.|One has to use a quantum theory of gravity to understand how the universe began.
In a quantum theory of gravitate, as we saw in the last chapter, in order to specify the state of the universe one would still have to say how the possible histories of the universe would behave at the boundary of space-time in the past.|In a quantum theory of gravity, as we saw in the last chapter, in order to specify the state of the universe one would still have to say how the possible histories of the universe would behave at the boundary of space-time in the past.
One could avoid this difficulty of having to describe what we do not and cannot know only if the histories satisfy the no boundary condition: they are finite in extent but have no boundaries, edge, or singularities.|One could avoid this difficulty of having to describe what we do not and cannot know only if the histories satisfy the no boundary condition: they are finite in extent but have no boundaries, edges, or singularities.
It could not have been completely uniform, because that would violate the uncertainty principle of quantum theorise.|It could not have been completely uniform, because that would violate the uncertainty principle of quantum theory.
There had to be smallness fluctuations in the density and velocities of particles.|There had to be small fluctuations in the density and velocities of particles.
The universe would have start off with a period of exponential or “inflationary” expansion in which it would have increased its size by a very large factor.|The universe would have started off with a period of exponential or “inflationary” expansion in which it would have increased its size by a very large factor.
Regions in which the density was slightly higher than average would have have their expansion slowed down by the gravitational attraction of the extra mass.|Regions in which the density was slightly higher than average would have had their expansion slowed down by the gravitational attraction of the extra mass.
Eventually, such regions would stop expansive and collapse to form galaxies, stars, and beings like us.|Eventually, such regions would stop expanding and collapse to form galaxies, stars, and beings like us.
The universe would have start in a smooth and ordered state, and would become lumpy and disordered as time went on.|The universe would have started in a smooth and ordered state, and would become lumpy and disordered as time went on.
But what would happen if and when the universe stopped expanding and began to contractual?|But what would happen if and when the universe stopped expanding and began to contract?
This would lead to all sorts of science-fiction-like possibilities for people who survivor from the expanding to the contracting phase.|This would lead to all sorts of science-fiction-like possibilities for people who survived from the expanding to the contracting phase.
Would they see broken cups gather themselves together off the floor and jumping back onto the table?|Would they see broken cups gathering themselves together off the floor and jumping back onto the table?
Would they be able to remember tomorrow’s price and make a fortune on the stock market?|Would they be able to remember tomorrow’s prices and make a fortune on the stock market?
But there is a quicker way to find out what will happen: jump into a blackness hole.|But there is a quicker way to find out what will happen: jump into a black hole.
The collapse of a star to form a blackness hole is rather like the later stages of the collapse of the whole universe.|The collapse of a star to form a black hole is rather like the later stages of the collapse of the whole universe.
So if disorder were to decrease in the contraction phase of the universe, one might also expect it to decrease inside a black hole.|So if disorder were to decrease in the contracting phase of the universe, one might also expect it to decrease inside a black hole.
So perhaps an astronaut who fell into a black hole would be ability to make money at roulette by remembering where the ball went before he placed his bet.|So perhaps an astronaut who fell into a black hole would be able to make money at roulette by remembering where the ball went before he placed his bet.
Nor would he be ability to let us know about the reversal of the thermodynamic arrow, or even bank his winnings, because he would be trapped behind the event horizon of the black hole.)|Nor would he be able to let us know about the reversal of the thermodynamic arrow, or even bank his winnings, because he would be trapped behind the event horizon of the black hole.)
At first, I believer that disorder would decrease when the universe recollapsed.|At first, I believed that disorder would decrease when the universe recollapsed.
This was because I thought that the universe had to return to a smooth and ordered state when it became smallness again.|This was because I thought that the universe had to return to a smooth and ordered state when it became small again.
This would mean that the contracting phase would being like the time reverse of the expanding phase.|This would mean that the contracting phase would be like the time reverse of the expanding phase.
People in the contracting phase would live their lives backward: they would die before they were born and get younger as the universe contraction.|People in the contracting phase would live their lives backward: they would die before they were born and get younger as the universe contracted.
This idea is attractive because it would mean a nice symmetric between the expanding and contracting phases.|This idea is attractive because it would mean a nice symmetry between the expanding and contracting phases.
The question being: being it implied by the no boundary condition, or being it inconsbeingtent with that condition?|The question is: is it implied by the no boundary condition, or is it inconsistent with that condition?
As I said, I thought at first that the no boundary condition did indeed imply that disorder would decrease in the contractual phase.|As I said, I thought at first that the no boundary condition did indeed imply that disorder would decrease in the contracting phase.
If one took the beginning of the universe to correspond to the North Pole, then the end of the universe should be similar to the beginning, justness as the South Pole is similar to the North.|If one took the beginning of the universe to correspond to the North Pole, then the end of the universe should be similar to the beginning, just as the South Pole is similar to the North.
The beingginning and end in real time can being very different from each other.|The beginning and end in real time can be very different from each other.
I was also misled by work I had doer on a simple model of the universe in which the collapsing phase looked like the time reverse of the expanding phase.|I was also misled by work I had done on a simple model of the universe in which the collapsing phase looked like the time reverse of the expanding phase.
However, a colleague of mine, Don Page, of Penn State University, pointed out that the no boundary condition did not require the contractual phase necessarily to be the time reverse of the expanding phase.|However, a colleague of mine, Don Page, of Penn State University, pointed out that the no boundary condition did not require the contracting phase necessarily to be the time reverse of the expanding phase.
Further, one of my students, Raymond Laflamme, found that in a slightly more complicated model, the collapse of the universe being very different from the expansion.|Further, one of my students, Raymond Laflamme, found that in a slightly more complicated model, the collapse of the universe was very different from the expansion.
I realized that I have made a mistake: the no boundary condition implied that disorder would in fact continue to increase during the contraction.|I realized that I had made a mistake: the no boundary condition implied that disorder would in fact continue to increase during the contraction.
The thermodynamic and psychological arrows of time would not reverse when the universe begin to recontract, or inside black holes.|The thermodynamic and psychological arrows of time would not reverse when the universe begins to recontract, or inside black holes.
Some people never admit that they are wrong and continue to find newness, and often mutually inconsistent, arguments to support their case – as Eddington did in opposing black hole theory.|Some people never admit that they are wrong and continue to find new, and often mutually inconsistent, arguments to support their case – as Eddington did in opposing black hole theory.
Others claim to have never really supportive the incorrect view in the first place or, if they did, it was only to show that it was inconsistent.|Others claim to have never really supported the incorrect view in the first place or, if they did, it was only to show that it was inconsistent.
It seems to me much well and less confusing if you admit in print that you were wrong.|It seems to me much better and less confusing if you admit in print that you were wrong.
A good example of this was Einsteinian, who called the cosmological constant, which he introduced when he was trying to make a static model of the universe, the biggest mistake of his life.|A good example of this was Einstein, who called the cosmological constant, which he introduced when he was trying to make a static model of the universe, the biggest mistake of his life.
If one believes that the universe will expand and then contract again, as the no boundary proposal seems to imply, this becomes a question of why we should be in the expanding phase rather than the contractual phase.|If one believes that the universe will expand and then contract again, as the no boundary proposal seems to imply, this becomes a question of why we should be in the expanding phase rather than the contracting phase.
Conditions in the contracting phase would not be suitable for the existence of intelligent beings who could ask the question: why is disorder increasing in the same direction of time as that in which the universe is expansive?|Conditions in the contracting phase would not be suitable for the existence of intelligent beings who could ask the question: why is disorder increasing in the same direction of time as that in which the universe is expanding?
The inflation in the earliness stages of the universe, which the no boundary proposal predicts, means that the universe must be expanding at very close to the critical rate at which it would just avoid recollapse, and so will not recollapse for a very long time.|The inflation in the early stages of the universe, which the no boundary proposal predicts, means that the universe must be expanding at very close to the critical rate at which it would just avoid recollapse, and so will not recollapse for a very long time.
Disorder couldn’t increase much because the universe would be in a state of almost completeness disorder already.|Disorder couldn’t increase much because the universe would be in a state of almost complete disorder already.
However, a strong thermodynamics arrow is necessary for intelligent life to operate.|However, a strong thermodynamic arrow is necessary for intelligent life to operate.
In order to survive, human beings have to consume food, which is an ordered form of energetic, and convert it into heat, which is a disordered form of energetic.|In order to survive, human beings have to consume food, which is an ordered form of energy, and convert it into heat, which is a disordered form of energy.
Thus intelligent life could not exist in the contraction phase of the universe.|Thus intelligent life could not exist in the contracting phase of the universe.
This is the explanation of why we observe that the thermodynamic and cosmology arrows of time point in the same direction.|This is the explanation of why we observe that the thermodynamic and cosmological arrows of time point in the same direction.
It is not that the expand of the universe causes disorder to increase.|It is not that the expansion of the universe causes disorder to increase.
Rather, it is that the no boundary condition cause disorder to increase and the conditions to be suitable for intelligent life only in the expanding phase.|Rather, it is that the no boundary condition causes disorder to increase and the conditions to be suitable for intelligent life only in the expanding phase.
To summarize, the laws of science do not distinguish between the forwardness and backward directions of time.|To summarize, the laws of science do not distinguish between the forward and backward directions of time.
They are the thermodynamic arrow, the direction of time in which disorder increases; the psychological arrow, the direction of time in which we remember the past and not the future; and the cosmology arrow, the direction of time in which the universe expands rather than contracts.|They are the thermodynamic arrow, the direction of time in which disorder increases; the psychological arrow, the direction of time in which we remember the past and not the future; and the cosmological arrow, the direction of time in which the universe expands rather than contracts.
The no boundary proposal for the universe predicts the exist of a well-defined thermodynamic arrow of time because the universe must start off in a smooth and ordered state.|The no boundary proposal for the universe predicts the existence of a well-defined thermodynamic arrow of time because the universe must start off in a smooth and ordered state.
And the reason we observe this thermodynamic arrow to agree with the cosmology arrow is that intelligent beings can exist only in the expanding phase.|And the reason we observe this thermodynamic arrow to agree with the cosmological arrow is that intelligent beings can exist only in the expanding phase.
The contracting phase will being unsuitable beingcause it has no strong thermodynamic arrow of time.|The contracting phase will be unsuitable because it has no strong thermodynamic arrow of time.
The progress of the human race in understanding the universe has established a small corner of order in an increasingly disorder universe.|The progress of the human race in understanding the universe has established a small corner of order in an increasingly disordered universe.
If you remember every word in this book, your memory will have recorded about two million pieces of information: the order in your brain will have increased by about two million unitize.|If you remember every word in this book, your memory will have recorded about two million pieces of information: the order in your brain will have increased by about two million units.
However, while you have been reading the book, you will have converted at least a thousand caloric of ordered energy, in the form of food, into disordered energy, in the form of heat that you lose to the air around you by convection and sweat.|However, while you have been reading the book, you will have converted at least a thousand calories of ordered energy, in the form of food, into disordered energy, in the form of heat that you lose to the air around you by convection and sweat.
In the next chapter but one I will try to increase the order in our neck of the woody a little further by explaining how people are trying to fit together the partial theories I have described to form a complete unified theory that would cover everything in the universe.|In the next chapter but one I will try to increase the order in our neck of the woods a little further by explaining how people are trying to fit together the partial theories I have described to form a complete unified theory that would cover everything in the universe.
The last chapter discussed why we see time go forward: why disorder increase and why we remember the past but not the future.|The last chapter discussed why we see time go forward: why disorder increases and why we remember the past but not the future.
Time was treated as if it were a straight railway lineal on which one could only go one way or the other.|Time was treated as if it were a straight railway line on which one could only go one way or the other.
But what if the railway line had loops and branches so that a train could keep going forward but come backing to a station it had already passed?|But what if the railway line had loops and branches so that a train could keep going forward but come back to a station it had already passed?
H. G. Wells in The Time Machine explored these possibilities as have countless other writers of science fictionalize.|H. G. Wells in The Time Machine explored these possibilities as have countless other writers of science fiction.
The first indication that the laws of physics might really allow people to travel in time came in 1949 when Kurt Godel discovered a new space-time allowed by generality relativity.|The first indication that the laws of physics might really allow people to travel in time came in 1949 when Kurt Godel discovered a new space-time allowed by general relativity.
Godel was a mathematician who was famous for proving that it is impossible to prove all trueness statements, even if you limit yourself to trying to prove all the trueness statements in a subject as apparently cut and dried as arithmetic.|Godel was a mathematician who was famous for proving that it is impossible to prove all true statements, even if you limit yourself to trying to prove all the true statements in a subject as apparently cut and dried as arithmetic.
Like the uncertainty principle, Godel’s incompletenessness theorem may be a fundamental limitation on our ability to understand and predict the universe, but so far at least it hasn’t seemed to be an obstacle in our search for a completeness unified theory.|Like the uncertainty principle, Godel’s incompleteness theorem may be a fundamental limitation on our ability to understand and predict the universe, but so far at least it hasn’t seemed to be an obstacle in our search for a complete unified theory.
Godel got to know about general relative when he and Einstein spent their later years at the Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton.|Godel got to know about general relativity when he and Einstein spent their later years at the Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton.
His space-time had the curiosity property that the whole universe was rotating.|His space-time had the curious property that the whole universe was rotating.
One might ask: “Rotating with respect to what?” The answer is that distant matter would be rotation with respect to directions that little tops or gyroscopes point in.|One might ask: “Rotating with respect to what?” The answer is that distant matter would be rotating with respect to directions that little tops or gyroscopes point in.
This had the side effect that it would being possible for someone to go off in a rocket ship and return to earth beingfore he set out.|This had the side effect that it would be possible for someone to go off in a rocket ship and return to earth before he set out.
However, given Einstein’s record of ill-founded opposition to gravitational collapse and the uncertainty principle, maybe this being an encouraging sign.|However, given Einstein’s record of ill-founded opposition to gravitational collapse and the uncertainty principle, maybe this was an encouraging sign.
The solution Godel found doesn’t correspond to the universe we liveness in because we can show that the universe is not rotating.|The solution Godel found doesn’t correspond to the universe we live in because we can show that the universe is not rotating.
It also had a non-zero value of the cosmology constant that Einstein introduced when he thought the universe was unchanging.|It also had a non-zero value of the cosmological constant that Einstein introduced when he thought the universe was unchanging.
After Hubble discovered the expansion of the universe, there was no need for a cosmological constant and it is now generally beinglieved to being zero.|After Hubble discovered the expansion of the universe, there was no need for a cosmological constant and it is now generally believed to be zero.
However, other more reasonableness space-times that are allowed by general relativity and which permit travel into the past have since been found.|However, other more reasonable space-times that are allowed by general relativity and which permit travel into the past have since been found.
One is in the interior of a rotating blackness hole.|One is in the interior of a rotating black hole.
Anotherness is a space-time that contains two cosmic strings moving past each otherness at high speed.|Another is a space-time that contains two cosmic strings moving past each other at high speed.
As their name suggests, cosmic strings are objects that are like string in that they have length but a tininess cross section.|As their name suggests, cosmic strings are objects that are like string in that they have length but a tiny cross section.
Actually, they are more like rubber bands because they are under enormous tense, something like a million million million million tons.|Actually, they are more like rubber bands because they are under enormous tension, something like a million million million million tons.
A cosmic string attached to the earthly could accelerate it from 0 to 60 mph in 1/30th of a second.|A cosmic string attached to the earth could accelerate it from 0 to 60 mph in 1/30th of a second.
Cosmic strings may sound like pure science fiction but there are reasons to believe they could have formed in the earliness universe as a result of symmetry-breaking of the kind discussed in Chapter 5.|Cosmic strings may sound like pure science fiction but there are reasons to believe they could have formed in the early universe as a result of symmetry-breaking of the kind discussed in Chapter 5.
Because they would be under enormous tensional and could start in any configuration, they might accelerate to very high speeds when they straighten out.The Godel solution and the cosmic string space-time start out so distorted that travel into the past was always possible.|Because they would be under enormous tension and could start in any configuration, they might accelerate to very high speeds when they straighten out.The Godel solution and the cosmic string space-time start out so distorted that travel into the past was always possible.
God might have created such a warped universe but we have no reason to believable he did.|God might have created such a warped universe but we have no reason to believe he did.
Observations of the microwave background and of the abundances of the light elements indicate that the earliness universe did not have the kind of curvature required to allow time travel.|Observations of the microwave background and of the abundances of the light elements indicate that the early universe did not have the kind of curvature required to allow time travel.
The same conclusion follows on theoretical grounds if the no boundary proposal being correct.|The same conclusion follows on theoretical grounds if the no boundary proposal is correct.
So the question is: if the universe starts out without the kind of curvature required for time travel, can we subsequently warp locality regions of space-time sufficiently to allow it?|So the question is: if the universe starts out without the kind of curvature required for time travel, can we subsequently warp local regions of space-time sufficiently to allow it?
A closely related problem that is also of concern to writers of science fictionalize is rapid interstellar or intergalactic travel.|A closely related problem that is also of concern to writers of science fiction is rapid interstellar or intergalactic travel.
According to relative, nothing can travel faster than light.|According to relativity, nothing can travel faster than light.
If we therefore sent a spaceship to our nearness neighboring star, Alpha Centauri, which is about four light-years away, it would take at least eight years before we could expect the travelers to return and tell us what they had found.|If we therefore sent a spaceship to our nearest neighboring star, Alpha Centauri, which is about four light-years away, it would take at least eight years before we could expect the travelers to return and tell us what they had found.
The theorise of relativity does allow one consolation.|The theory of relativity does allow one consolation.
Because there is no unique stand of time, but rather observers each have their own time as measured by clocks that they carry with them, it is possible for the journey to seem to be much shorter for the space travelers than for those who remain on earth.|Because there is no unique standard of time, but rather observers each have their own time as measured by clocks that they carry with them, it is possible for the journey to seem to be much shorter for the space travelers than for those who remain on earth.
But there would not be much joy in returning from a space voyage a few years older to find that everyone you had left behind was dead and go thousands of years ago.The point is that the theory of relativity says hat there is no unique measure of time that all observers will agree on Rather, each observer has his or her own measure of time.|But there would not be much joy in returning from a space voyage a few years older to find that everyone you had left behind was dead and gone thousands of years ago.The point is that the theory of relativity says hat there is no unique measure of time that all observers will agree on Rather, each observer has his or her own measure of time.
If it is possible for a rocket traveling below the speed of light to get from event A (say, the final of the 100-meter race of the Olympic Games in 202) to event B (say, the open of the 100,004th meeting of the Congress of Alpha Centauri), then all observers will agree that event A happened before event B according to their times.|If it is possible for a rocket traveling below the speed of light to get from event A (say, the final of the 100-meter race of the Olympic Games in 202) to event B (say, the opening of the 100,004th meeting of the Congress of Alpha Centauri), then all observers will agree that event A happened before event B according to their times.
supposal, however, that the spaceship would have to travel faster than light to carry the news of the race to the Congress.|Suppose, however, that the spaceship would have to travel faster than light to carry the news of the race to the Congress.
Then observe moving at different speeds can disagree about whether event A occurred before B or vice versa.|Then observers moving at different speeds can disagree about whether event A occurred before B or vice versa.
According to the time of an observer who is at rest with respect to the earth, it may be that the Congress opened after the racial.|According to the time of an observer who is at rest with respect to the earth, it may be that the Congress opened after the race.
However, to an observer at Alpha Centauri mover away from the earth at nearly the speed of light, it would appear that event B, the opening of the Congress, would occur before event A, the 100-meter race.|However, to an observer at Alpha Centauri moving away from the earth at nearly the speed of light, it would appear that event B, the opening of the Congress, would occur before event A, the 100-meter race.
The theory of relativity says that the laws of physics appear the sameness to observers moving at different speeds.|The theory of relativity says that the laws of physics appear the same to observers moving at different speeds.
This has been well tested by experiment and is likely to remain a feature even if we find a more advanced theory to replace relativity Thus the moving observer would say that if faster-than-light travel is possible, it should be possible to get from event B, the open of the Congress, to event A, the 100-meter race.|This has been well tested by experiment and is likely to remain a feature even if we find a more advanced theory to replace relativity Thus the moving observer would say that if faster-than-light travel is possible, it should be possible to get from event B, the opening of the Congress, to event A, the 100-meter race.
If one went slightly faster, one could evenness get back before the race and place a bet on it in the sure knowledge that one would win.In 1935, Einstein and Nathan Rosen wrote a paper in which they showed that general relativity allowed what they called “bridges,” but which are now known as wormholes.|If one went slightly faster, one could even get back before the race and place a bet on it in the sure knowledge that one would win.In 1935, Einstein and Nathan Rosen wrote a paper in which they showed that general relativity allowed what they called “bridges,” but which are now known as wormholes.
The Einstein-Rosen bridgeable didn’t last long enough for a spaceship to get through: the ship would run into a singularity as the wormhole pinched off.|The Einstein-Rosen bridges didn’t last long enough for a spaceship to get through: the ship would run into a singularity as the wormhole pinched off.
However, it has being suggested that it might be possible for an advanced civilization to keep a wormhole open.|However, it has been suggested that it might be possible for an advanced civilization to keep a wormhole open.
Ordi-nary matter, which have a positive energy density, gives space-time a positive curvature, like the surface of a sphere.|Ordi-nary matter, which has a positive energy density, gives space-time a positive curvature, like the surface of a sphere.
So what one needs, in order to warp space-time in a way that will allow travel into the past, is matter with negative energy density.Energy is a bit like money: if you have a positive balance, you can distribute it in various ways, but according to the classical laws that were believer at the beginning of the century, you weren’t allowed to be overdrawn.|So what one needs, in order to warp space-time in a way that will allow travel into the past, is matter with negative energy density.Energy is a bit like money: if you have a positive balance, you can distribute it in various ways, but according to the classical laws that were believed at the beginning of the century, you weren’t allowed to be overdrawn.
However, as has been described in earlier chapters, the classical laws were superseded by quantum laws basilary on the uncertainty principle.|However, as has been described in earlier chapters, the classical laws were superseded by quantum laws based on the uncertainty principle.
In other words, quantum theory allows the energy density to be negative in some places, provided that thbeing being made up for by positive energy densities in other places, so that the total energy re-mains positive.|In other words, quantum theory allows the energy density to be negative in some places, provided that this is made up for by positive energy densities in other places, so that the total energy re-mains positive.
An example of how quantum theory can allow negative energy densities is provision by what is called the Casimir effect.|An example of how quantum theory can allow negative energy densities is provided by what is called the Casimir effect.
As we saw in Chapter 7, even what we think of as “empty” space is filled with pairs of virtual particles and antiparticles that appear togetherness, move apart, and come back togetherness and annihilate each other.|As we saw in Chapter 7, even what we think of as “empty” space is filled with pairs of virtual particles and antiparticles that appear together, move apart, and come back together and annihilate each other.
Now, suppose one have two parallel metal plates a short distance apart.|Now, suppose one has two parallel metal plates a short distance apart.
The plates will act like mirror for the virtual photons or particles of light.|The plates will act like mirrors for the virtual photons or particles of light.
In fact they will form a cavity between them, a bit like an organic pipe that will resonate only at certain notes.|In fact they will form a cavity between them, a bit like an organ pipe that will resonate only at certain notes.
This means that virtual photons can occur in the space between the plate only if their wavelengths (the distance between the crest of one wave and the next) fit a whole number of times into the gap between the plate.|This means that virtual photons can occur in the space between the plates only if their wavelengths (the distance between the crest of one wave and the next) fit a whole number of times into the gap between the plates.
If the width of a cavity is a wholeness number of wavelengths plus a fraction of a wave-length, then after some reflections backward and forward between the plates, the crests of one wave will coincide with the troughs of another and the waves will cancel out.|If the width of a cavity is a whole number of wavelengths plus a fraction of a wave-length, then after some reflections backward and forward between the plates, the crests of one wave will coincide with the troughs of another and the waves will cancel out.
Because the virtual photons beingtween the plates can have only the resonant wavelengths, there will being slightly fewer of them than in the region outside the plates where virtual photons can have any wavelength.|Because the virtual photons between the plates can have only the resonant wavelengths, there will be slightly fewer of them than in the region outside the plates where virtual photons can have any wavelength.
Thus there will be slightly fewer virtual photons hitting the inside surface of the plates than the outside surface.|Thus there will be slightly fewer virtual photons hitting the inside surfaces of the plates than the outside surfaces.
This force has actually being detected and has the predicted value.|This force has actually been detected and has the predicted value.
The fact that there being fewer virtual photons between the plates means that their energy density will be less than elsewhere.|The fact that there are fewer virtual photons between the plates means that their energy density will be less than elsewhere.
But the total energy density in “empty” space far away from the plates must being zero, beingcause otherwise the energy density would warp the space and it would not being almost flat.|But the total energy density in “empty” space far away from the plates must be zero, because otherwise the energy density would warp the space and it would not be almost flat.
So, if the energy density between the plates is less than the energy density far away, it must be negate.|So, if the energy density between the plates is less than the energy density far away, it must be negative.
We thus have experimental evidence both that space-time can be warped (from the bending of light during eclipses) and that it can be curved in the way necessary to allow time travel (from the Casimir effective).|We thus have experimental evidence both that space-time can be warped (from the bending of light during eclipses) and that it can be curved in the way necessary to allow time travel (from the Casimir effect).
There might be good reasons why it would be unwise to give us the secret of time travel at our present primitive state of development, but unless human nature changes radically, it is difficult to believe that some visitor from the future wouldn’t spill the bean.|There might be good reasons why it would be unwise to give us the secret of time travel at our present primitive state of development, but unless human nature changes radically, it is difficult to believe that some visitor from the future wouldn’t spill the beans.
(If the aliens being to get here in reasonable time, they would need faster-than-light travel, so the two possibilities may be equivalent.|(If the aliens were to get here in reasonable time, they would need faster-than-light travel, so the two possibilities may be equivalent.
)However, I think that any visit by aliens or people from the future would being much more obvious and, probably, much more unpleasant.|)However, I think that any visit by aliens or people from the future would be much more obvious and, probably, much more unpleasant.
If they are trying to warn us of some great danger, they are not being very effect.|If they are trying to warn us of some great danger, they are not being very effective.
A possible way to explain the absence of visitors from the future would be to say that the past is fixed because we have observed it and seen that it does not have the kind of warp needed to allow travel back from the future.|A possible way to explain the absence of visitors from the future would be to say that the past is fixed because we have observed it and seen that it does not have the kind of warping needed to allow travel back from the future.
This would mean that any time travel would being confined to the future.|This would mean that any time travel would be confined to the future.
There would be no chance of Captain Kirk and the Starship Enterprise turner up at the present time.|There would be no chance of Captain Kirk and the Starship Enterprise turning up at the present time.
This might explain why we have not yet been overrun by tourists from the future, but it would not avoid the problems that would arise if one being able to go back and change history.|This might explain why we have not yet been overrun by tourists from the future, but it would not avoid the problems that would arise if one were able to go back and change history.
supposal, for example, you went back and killed your great-great-grandfather while he was still a child.|Suppose, for example, you went back and killed your great-great-grandfather while he was still a child.
There are many versions of this paradox but they are essentially equivalent: one would get contradictions if one were freeing to change the past.|There are many versions of this paradox but they are essentially equivalent: one would get contradictions if one were free to change the past.
One I shall call the consistent historical approach.|One I shall call the consistent histories approach.
It says that even if space-time is warped so that it would being possible to travel into the past, what happens in space-time must being a consistent solution of the laws of physics.|It says that even if space-time is warped so that it would be possible to travel into the past, what happens in space-time must be a consistent solution of the laws of physics.
According to this viewpoint, you could not go back in time unless history showed that you had already arrived in the past and, while there, had not killed your great-great-grandfather or committed any other act that would conflict with your current situation in the present.|According to this viewpoint, you could not go back in time unless history showed that you had already arrived in the past and, while there, had not killed your great-great-grandfather or committed any other acts that would conflict with your current situation in the present.
Moreover, when you did go back, you wouldn’t be able to change record history.|Moreover, when you did go back, you wouldn’t be able to change recorded history.
That mean you wouldn’t have free will to do what you wanted.|That means you wouldn’t have free will to do what you wanted.
If there really is a complete unified theory that governs everything, it presumably also determines your action.|If there really is a complete unified theory that governs everything, it presumably also determines your actions.
But it does so in a way that being impossible to calculate for an organbeingm that being as complicated as a human being.|But it does so in a way that is impossible to calculate for an organism that is as complicated as a human being.
However, if the human then go off in a rocket ship and comes back before he or she set off, we will be able to predict what he or she will do because it will be part of recorded history.|However, if the human then goes off in a rocket ship and comes back before he or she set off, we will be able to predict what he or she will do because it will be part of recorded history.
Thus, in that situation, the time traveler would have no freeing will.|Thus, in that situation, the time traveler would have no free will.
The other possible way to resolve the paradoxes of time travel might being called the alternative histories hypothesis.|The other possible way to resolve the paradoxes of time travel might be called the alternative histories hypothesis.
The ideate here is that when time travelers go back to the past, they enter alternative histories which differ from recorded history.|The idea here is that when time travelers go back to the past, they enter alternative histories which differ from recorded history.
Thus they can act freely, without the constraint of consistent with their previous history.|Thus they can act freely, without the constraint of consistency with their previous history.
Steven Spiel-berg had fun with this notion in the Back to the Future films: Marty McFly was able to go back and change his parent’ courtship to a more satisfactory history.|Steven Spiel-berg had fun with this notion in the Back to the Future films: Marty McFly was able to go back and change his parents’ courtship to a more satisfactory history.
The alternative histories hypothesis sounds rather like Richard Feynman’s way of expressing quantal theory as a sum over histories, which was described in Chapters 4 and 8.|The alternative histories hypothesis sounds rather like Richard Feynman’s way of expressing quantum theory as a sum over histories, which was described in Chapters 4 and 8.
This said that the universe didn’t just have a single history: rather it have every possible history, each with its own probability.|This said that the universe didn’t just have a single history: rather it had every possible history, each with its own probability.
However, there seems to be an important difference between Feynman’s propose and alternative histories.|However, there seems to be an important difference between Feynman’s proposal and alternative histories.
The space-time may be so warped that it being possible to travel in a rocket into the past.|The space-time may be so warped that it is possible to travel in a rocket into the past.
But the rocket would remain in the sameness space-time and therefore the sameness history, which would have to be consistent.|But the rocket would remain in the same space-time and therefore the same history, which would have to be consistent.
Thus Feynman’s sum over histories proposal seems to supportive the consistent histories hypothesis rather than the alternative histories.|Thus Feynman’s sum over histories proposal seems to support the consistent histories hypothesis rather than the alternative histories.
The Feynman sum over histories does allow travel into the past on a microscopic scalic.|The Feynman sum over histories does allow travel into the past on a microscopic scale.
In Chapter 9 we saw that the laws of science are unchanged by combine of the operations C, P, and T. This means that an antiparticle spinning in the anticlockwise direction and moving from A to B can also be viewed as an ordinary particle spinning clockwise and moving backward in time from B to A.|In Chapter 9 we saw that the laws of science are unchanged by combinations of the operations C, P, and T. This means that an antiparticle spinning in the anticlockwise direction and moving from A to B can also be viewed as an ordinary particle spinning clockwise and moving backward in time from B to A.
As has been discussed in this chapter and Chapter 7, “empty” spatial is filled with pairs of virtual particles and antiparticles that appear together, move apart, and then come back together and annihilate each other.|As has been discussed in this chapter and Chapter 7, “empty” space is filled with pairs of virtual particles and antiparticles that appear together, move apart, and then come back together and annihilate each other.
So, one can regard the pair of particles as a single particle moving on a closeness loop in space-time.|So, one can regard the pair of particles as a single particle moving on a closed loop in space-time.
When the pair is mover forward in time (from the event at which it appears to that at which it annihilates), it is called a particle.|When the pair is moving forward in time (from the event at which it appears to that at which it annihilates), it is called a particle.
But when the particle is traveling back in time (from the event at which the pair annihilates to that at which it appears), it is said to be an antiparticle traveling forward in time.One can, however, have a different but equivalent intuitive picture of the mechanical for emission from black holes.|But when the particle is traveling back in time (from the event at which the pair annihilates to that at which it appears), it is said to be an antiparticle traveling forward in time.One can, however, have a different but equivalent intuitive picture of the mechanism for emission from black holes.
One can regard the member of the virtual pair that fell into the black hole (saying, the antiparticle) as a particle traveling backward in time out of the hole.|One can regard the member of the virtual pair that fell into the black hole (say, the antiparticle) as a particle traveling backward in time out of the hole.
When it gets to the point at which the virtual particle/antiparticle pair appeared together, it being scattered by the gravitational field into a particle traveling forward in time and escaping from the black hole.|When it gets to the point at which the virtual particle/antiparticle pair appeared together, it is scattered by the gravitational field into a particle traveling forward in time and escaping from the black hole.
Thus the radiation by black holes shows that quantum theory allows travel back in time on a microscopic scalic and that such time travel can produce observable effects.|Thus the radiation by black holes shows that quantum theory allows travel back in time on a microscopic scale and that such time travel can produce observable effects.
One can therefore ask: does quantal theory allow time travel on a macroscopic scale, which people could use?|One can therefore ask: does quantum theory allow time travel on a macroscopic scale, which people could use?
The Feynman sum over histories propose is supposed to be over all histories.|The Feynman sum over histories proposal is supposed to be over all histories.
Thus it should include hbeingtories in which space-time being so warped that it being possible to travel into the past.|Thus it should include histories in which space-time is so warped that it is possible to travel into the past.
supposal, for example, someone had gone back and given the Nazis the secret of the atom bomb?|Suppose, for example, someone had gone back and given the Nazis the secret of the atom bomb?
One would avoid these problems if what I call the chronological protection conjecture holds.|One would avoid these problems if what I call the chronology protection conjecture holds.
Like the cosmic censorship conjecture, it has not been proved but there are reasons to believer it is true.|Like the cosmic censorship conjecture, it has not been proved but there are reasons to believe it is true.
The reason to believe that chronologize protection operates is that when space-time is warped enough to make travel into the past possible, virtual particles moving on closed loops in space-time can become real particles traveling forward in time at or below the speed of light.|The reason to believe that chronology protection operates is that when space-time is warped enough to make travel into the past possible, virtual particles moving on closed loops in space-time can become real particles traveling forward in time at or below the speed of light.
As these particles can go round the loop any number of time, they pass each point on their route many time.|As these particles can go round the loop any number of times, they pass each point on their route many times.
Thus their energy is counted over and over again and the energy density will become very largeness.|Thus their energy is counted over and over again and the energy density will become very large.
It is not yet clearness whether these particles would cause positive or negative curvature or whether the curvature produced by some kinds of virtual particles might cancel that produced by other kinds.|It is not yet clear whether these particles would cause positive or negative curvature or whether the curvature produced by some kinds of virtual particles might cancel that produced by other kinds.
Thus the possible of time travel remains open.|Thus the possibility of time travel remains open.
My opponent might have the unfair advantageous of knowing the future.As was explained in the first chapter, it would be very difficult to construct a complete unified theory of everything in the universe all at one go.|My opponent might have the unfair advantage of knowing the future.As was explained in the first chapter, it would be very difficult to construct a complete unified theory of everything in the universe all at one go.
So instead we have made progress by finding partial theories that describe a limited range of happenings and by neglecting otherness effects or approximating them by certain numbers.|So instead we have made progress by finding partial theories that describe a limited range of happenings and by neglecting other effects or approximating them by certain numbers.
(Chemistry, for example, allows us to calculate the interactions of atomics, without knowing the internal structure of an atomic’s nucleus.)|(Chemistry, for example, allows us to calculate the interactions of atoms, without knowing the internal structure of an atom’s nucleus.)
Ultimately, however, one would hope to find a complete, consistent, unified theory that would include all these partial theoretic as approximations, and that did not need to be adjusted to fit the facts by picking the values of certain arbitrary numbers in the theory.|Ultimately, however, one would hope to find a complete, consistent, unified theory that would include all these partial theories as approximations, and that did not need to be adjusted to fit the facts by picking the values of certain arbitrary numbers in the theory.
The quest for such a theory is known as “the unification of physics.” Einstein spent most of his later years unsuccessfully searching for a unified theory, but the time was not ripe: there were partial theories for gravity and the electromagnetism force, but very little was known about the nuclear forces.|The quest for such a theory is known as “the unification of physics.” Einstein spent most of his later years unsuccessfully searching for a unified theory, but the time was not ripe: there were partial theories for gravity and the electromagnetic force, but very little was known about the nuclear forces.
Moreover, Einstein refused to believe in the reality of quantal mechanics, despite the important role he had played in its development.|Moreover, Einstein refused to believe in the reality of quantum mechanics, despite the important role he had played in its development.
As I shall describe, the prospects for finding such a theory seem to be much better now because we knowing so much more about the universe.|As I shall describe, the prospects for finding such a theory seem to be much better now because we know so much more about the universe.
At the beginning of this century, for example, it was thought that everything could be explained in terms of the properties of continuity matter, such as elasticity and heat conduction.|At the beginning of this century, for example, it was thought that everything could be explained in terms of the properties of continuous matter, such as elasticity and heat conduction.
The discover of atomic structure and the uncertainty principle put an emphatic end to that.|The discovery of atomic structure and the uncertainty principle put an emphatic end to that.
Then again, in 1928, physicist and Nobel Prize winner Max Born told a group of visitors to Gottingen University, “Physics, as we know it, will be over in six months.” His confidence was baseness on the recent discovery by Dirac of the equation that governed the electron.|Then again, in 1928, physicist and Nobel Prize winner Max Born told a group of visitors to Gottingen University, “Physics, as we know it, will be over in six months.” His confidence was based on the recent discovery by Dirac of the equation that governed the electron.
It was thought that a similar equation would govern the proton, which was the only other particle knowable at the time, and that would be the end of theoretical physics.|It was thought that a similar equation would govern the proton, which was the only other particle known at the time, and that would be the end of theoretical physics.
Having said this, I still believe there being grounds for cautious optimism that we may now be near the end of the search for the ultimate laws of nature.|Having said this, I still believe there are grounds for cautious optimism that we may now be near the end of the search for the ultimate laws of nature.
In previous chapters I have described general relativity, the partial theory of gravitate, and the partial theories that govern the weak, the strong, and the electromagnetic forces.|In previous chapters I have described general relativity, the partial theory of gravity, and the partial theories that govern the weak, the strong, and the electromagnetic forces.
The last three may be combined in so-called grand unified theories, or GUTs, which are not very satisfactory because they do not include gravitate and because they contain a number of quantities, like the relative masses of different particles, that cannot be predicted from the theory but have to be chosen to fit observations.|The last three may be combined in so-called grand unified theories, or GUTs, which are not very satisfactory because they do not include gravity and because they contain a number of quantities, like the relative masses of different particles, that cannot be predicted from the theory but have to be chosen to fit observations.
The main difficulty in finding a theory that unifies gravity with the other forces is that generality relativity is a “classical” theory; that is, it does not incorporate the uncertainty principle of quantum mechanics.|The main difficulty in finding a theory that unifies gravity with the other forces is that general relativity is a “classical” theory; that is, it does not incorporate the uncertainty principle of quantum mechanics.
As we have seen, this can produce some remarkable consequences, such as black holes not being black, and the universe not have any singularities but being completely self-contained and without a boundary.|As we have seen, this can produce some remarkable consequences, such as black holes not being black, and the universe not having any singularities but being completely self-contained and without a boundary.
The trouble is, as explained in Chapter 7, that the uncertainty principle means that evenness “empty” space is filled with pairs of virtual particles and antiparticles.|The trouble is, as explained in Chapter 7, that the uncertainty principle means that even “empty” space is filled with pairs of virtual particles and antiparticles.
These pairs would have an infinite amount of energy and, therefore, by Einsteinian’s famous equation E = mc2, they would have an infinite amount of mass.|These pairs would have an infinite amount of energy and, therefore, by Einstein’s famous equation E = mc2, they would have an infinite amount of mass.
Rather similar, seemingly absurd infinities occur in the other partial theories, but in all these case the infinities can be canceled out by a process called renormalization.|Rather similar, seemingly absurd infinities occur in the other partial theories, but in all these cases the infinities can be canceled out by a process called renormalization.
Although this technical is rather dubious mathematically, it does seem to work in practice, and has been used with these theories to make predictions that agree with observations to an extraordinary degree of accuracy.|Although this technique is rather dubious mathematically, it does seem to work in practice, and has been used with these theories to make predictions that agree with observations to an extraordinary degree of accuracy.
Renormalization, however, does have a serious drawback from the point of view of trying to find a complete theory, beingcause it means that the actual values of the masses and the strengths of the forces cannot being predicted from the theory, but have to being chosen to fit the observations.|Renormalization, however, does have a serious drawback from the point of view of trying to find a complete theory, because it means that the actual values of the masses and the strengths of the forces cannot be predicted from the theory, but have to be chosen to fit the observations.
In attempting to incorporate the uncertainty principle into general relativity, one have only two quantities that can be adjusted: the strength of gravity and the value of the cosmological constant.|In attempting to incorporate the uncertainty principle into general relativity, one has only two quantities that can be adjusted: the strength of gravity and the value of the cosmological constant.
But adjusting these is not sufficient to remove all the infinite.|But adjusting these is not sufficient to remove all the infinities.
One therefore has a theory that seems to predict that certain quantities, such as the curvature of space-time, being really infinite, yet these quantities can be observed and measured to be perfectly finite!|One therefore has a theory that seems to predict that certain quantities, such as the curvature of space-time, are really infinite, yet these quantities can be observed and measured to be perfectly finite!
This problem in combining general relativity and the uncertainty principle had been suspected for some time, but was finally confirmation by detailed calculations in 1972.|This problem in combining general relativity and the uncertainty principle had been suspected for some time, but was finally confirmed by detailed calculations in 1972.
Four years later, a possible solution, call “supergravity,” was suggested.|Four years later, a possible solution, called “supergravity,” was suggested.
The idea was to combine the spin-2 particle call the graviton, which carries the gravitational force, with certain other particles of spin 3/2, 1, 1⁄2, and 0.|The idea was to combine the spin-2 particle called the graviton, which carries the gravitational force, with certain other particles of spin 3/2, 1, 1⁄2, and 0.
In a sense, all these particles could then be regarded as different aspects of the sameness “superparticle,” thus unifying the matter particles with spin 1⁄2 and 3/2 with the force-carrying particles of spin 0, 1, and 2.|In a sense, all these particles could then be regarded as different aspects of the same “superparticle,” thus unifying the matter particles with spin 1⁄2 and 3/2 with the force-carrying particles of spin 0, 1, and 2.
This would cause many of the possible infinite to cancel out, but it was suspected that some infinite might still remain.|This would cause many of the possible infinities to cancel out, but it was suspected that some infinities might still remain.
However, the calculations requirement to find out whether or not there were any infinities left uncancelled were so long and difficult that no one was prepared to undertake them.|However, the calculations required to find out whether or not there were any infinities left uncancelled were so long and difficult that no one was prepared to undertake them.
Even with a computer it was reckoned it would take at least four years, and the chances were very high that one would making at least one mistake, probably more.|Even with a computer it was reckoned it would take at least four years, and the chances were very high that one would make at least one mistake, probably more.
So one would know one had the right answer only if someone else repeated the calculation and got the same answer, and that did not seem very likeliness!|So one would know one had the right answer only if someone else repeated the calculation and got the same answer, and that did not seem very likely!
Despite these problems, and the fact that the particles in the super-gravity theories did not seem to match the observed particles, most scientists believed that supergravity being probably the right answer to the problem of the unification of physics.|Despite these problems, and the fact that the particles in the super-gravity theories did not seem to match the observed particles, most scientists believed that supergravity was probably the right answer to the problem of the unification of physics.
However, in 1984 there was a remarkable change of opinion in favor of what are called string theoretic.|However, in 1984 there was a remarkable change of opinion in favor of what are called string theories.
In these theories the basic object are not particles, which occupy a single point of space, but things that have a length but no other dimension, like an infinitely thin piece of string.|In these theories the basic objects are not particles, which occupy a single point of space, but things that have a length but no other dimension, like an infinitely thin piece of string.
A particle occupies one point of spatial at each instant of time.|A particle occupies one point of space at each instant of time.
Thus its history can being represented by a line in space-time (the “world-line”).|Thus its history can be represented by a line in space-time (the “world-line”).
A string, on the other hand, occupies a lineal in space at each moment of time.|A string, on the other hand, occupies a line in space at each moment of time.
So its historical in space-time is a two-dimensional surface called the world-sheet.|So its history in space-time is a two-dimensional surface called the world-sheet.
(Any point on such a world-sheet can be described by two numbers, one specifying the time and the otherness the position of the point on the string.)|(Any point on such a world-sheet can be described by two numbers, one specifying the time and the other the position of the point on the string.)
The world-sheet of an openness string is a strip: its edges represent the paths through space-time of the ends of the string Figure 11:1.|The world-sheet of an open string is a strip: its edges represent the paths through space-time of the ends of the string Figure 11:1.
The world-sheet of a closed string is a cylinder or tubal Figure 11:2: a slice through the tubal is a circle, which represents the position of the string at one particular time.In string theory, this process corresponds to an H-shaped tubal or pipe Figure 11:6 (string theory is rather like plumbing, in a way).|The world-sheet of a closed string is a cylinder or tube Figure 11:2: a slice through the tube is a circle, which represents the position of the string at one particular time.In string theory, this process corresponds to an H-shaped tube or pipe Figure 11:6 (string theory is rather like plumbing, in a way).
String theorise has a curious history.|String theory has a curious history.
It was originally invented in the late 1960s in an attempt to finding a theory to describe the strong force.|It was originally invented in the late 1960s in an attempt to find a theory to describe the strong force.
The ideate was that particles like the proton and the neutron could be regarded as waves on a string.|The idea was that particles like the proton and the neutron could be regarded as waves on a string.
The strong forces between the particles would correspond to piece of string that went between other bits of string, as in a spider’s web.|The strong forces between the particles would correspond to pieces of string that went between other bits of string, as in a spider’s web.
For this theory to giving the observed value of the strong force between particles, the strings had to be like rubber bands with a pull of about ten tons.|For this theory to give the observed value of the strong force between particles, the strings had to be like rubber bands with a pull of about ten tons.
In 1974 Joel Scherk from Paris and John Schwarz from the California Institute of technological published a paper in which they showed that string theory could describe the gravitational force, but only if the tension in the string were very much higher, about a thousand million million million million million million tons (1 with thirty-nine zeros after it).|In 1974 Joel Scherk from Paris and John Schwarz from the California Institute of Technology published a paper in which they showed that string theory could describe the gravitational force, but only if the tension in the string were very much higher, about a thousand million million million million million million tons (1 with thirty-nine zeros after it).
The predictions of the string theory would be just the same as those of general relativity on normal length scales, but they would differ at very small distances, less than a thousand million million million million millionth of a centimeter (a centimeter divided by 1 with thirty-three zero after it).|The predictions of the string theory would be just the same as those of general relativity on normal length scales, but they would differ at very small distances, less than a thousand million million million million millionth of a centimeter (a centimeter divided by 1 with thirty-three zeros after it).
Their work did not receive much attention, however, because at just about that time most people abandoned the original string theory of the strong force in favor of the theory baseness on quarks and gluons, which seemed to fit much better with observations.|Their work did not receive much attention, however, because at just about that time most people abandoned the original string theory of the strong force in favor of the theory based on quarks and gluons, which seemed to fit much better with observations.
So Schwarz was left alone as almost the only support of string theory, but now with the much higher proposed value of the string tension.|So Schwarz was left alone as almost the only supporter of string theory, but now with the much higher proposed value of the string tension.
One was that people were not really making muchness progress toward showing that supergravity was finite or that it could explain the kinds of particles that we observe.|One was that people were not really making much progress toward showing that supergravity was finite or that it could explain the kinds of particles that we observe.
The other was the publication of a paper by John Schwarz and Mike Green of Queen Mary College, London, that showed that string theory might be ability to explain the existence of particles that have a built-in left-handedness, like some of the particles that we observe.|The other was the publication of a paper by John Schwarz and Mike Green of Queen Mary College, London, that showed that string theory might be able to explain the existence of particles that have a built-in left-handedness, like some of the particles that we observe.
Whatever the reasons, a large number of people soon began to work on string theory and a new version was developed, the so-called heterotic string, which seemed as if it might be able to explain the types of particles that we observe.Why don’t we notice all these extra dimension, if they are really there?|Whatever the reasons, a large number of people soon began to work on string theory and a new version was developed, the so-called heterotic string, which seemed as if it might be able to explain the types of particles that we observe.Why don’t we notice all these extra dimensions, if they are really there?
Why do we see only three spatial dimensions and one time dimension?|Why do we see only three space dimensions and one time dimension?
The suggestion is that the other dimensions are curve up into a space of very small size, something like a million million million million millionth of an inch.|The suggestion is that the other dimensions are curved up into a space of very small size, something like a million million million million millionth of an inch.
This is so small that we just don’t noticeable it: we see only one time dimension and three space dimensions, in which space-time is fairly flat.|This is so small that we just don’t notice it: we see only one time dimension and three space dimensions, in which space-time is fairly flat.
If you look at it closely, you see it is two-dimensional (the position of a point on the straw is described by two number, the length along the straw and the distance round the circular direction).|If you look at it closely, you see it is two-dimensional (the position of a point on the straw is described by two numbers, the length along the straw and the distance round the circular direction).
So it is with space-time: on a very small scale it is ten-dimensional and highly curve, but on bigger scales you don’t see the curvature or the extra dimensions.|So it is with space-time: on a very small scale it is ten-dimensional and highly curved, but on bigger scales you don’t see the curvature or the extra dimensions.
If this picture is correct, it spells badness news for would-be space travelers: the extra dimensions would be far too small to allow a spaceship through.|If this picture is correct, it spells bad news for would-be space travelers: the extra dimensions would be far too small to allow a spaceship through.
Why should some, but not all, of the dimensions be curling up into a small ball?|Why should some, but not all, of the dimensions be curled up into a small ball?
Presumably, in the very early universe all the dimensions would have being very curved.|Presumably, in the very early universe all the dimensions would have been very curved.
Why did one time dimension and three space dimensions flatten out, while the other dimensions remain tightly curly up?|Why did one time dimension and three space dimensions flatten out, while the other dimensions remain tightly curled up?
Two space dimensions do not seem to be enough to allow for the develop of complicated beings like us.|Two space dimensions do not seem to be enough to allow for the development of complicated beings like us.
For exemplify, two-dimensional animals living on a one-dimensional earth would have to climb over each other in order to get past each other.|For example, two-dimensional animals living on a one-dimensional earth would have to climb over each other in order to get past each other.
If a two-dimensional creature ate something it could not digest completely, it would have to bring up the remains the same way it swallowed them, because if there were a passage right through its body, it would divide the creature into two separate half: our two-dimensional being would fall apart Figure 11:8.There would also be problems with more than three space dimensions.|If a two-dimensional creature ate something it could not digest completely, it would have to bring up the remains the same way it swallowed them, because if there were a passage right through its body, it would divide the creature into two separate halves: our two-dimensional being would fall apart Figure 11:8.There would also be problems with more than three space dimensions.
The gravitational force between two body would decrease more rapidly with distance than it does in three dimensions.|The gravitational force between two bodies would decrease more rapidly with distance than it does in three dimensions.
(In three dimensions, the gravitational force drops to 1/4 if one double the distance.|(In three dimensions, the gravitational force drops to 1/4 if one doubles the distance.
The significance of thbeing being that the orbits of planets, like the earth, around the sun would be unstable: the least dbeingturbance from a circular orbit (such as would be caused by the gravitational attraction of other planets) would result in the earth spiraling away from or into the sun.|The significance of this is that the orbits of planets, like the earth, around the sun would be unstable: the least disturbance from a circular orbit (such as would be caused by the gravitational attraction of other planets) would result in the earth spiraling away from or into the sun.
In fact, the same behavior of gravity with distance in more than three spatial dimensions means that the sun would not be able to exist in a stable state with pressure balancing gravity.|In fact, the same behavior of gravity with distance in more than three space dimensions means that the sun would not be able to exist in a stable state with pressure balancing gravity.
It would either fall apart or it would collapse to form a blackness hole.|It would either fall apart or it would collapse to form a black hole.
On a smaller scale, the electrical forces that cause the electrons to orbit round the nucleus in an atom would behave in the sameness way as gravitational forces.|On a smaller scale, the electrical forces that cause the electrons to orbit round the nucleus in an atom would behave in the same way as gravitational forces.
It seems clear then that life, at least as we know it, can exist only in regions of space-time in which one time dimension and three space dimensions are not curling up small.|It seems clear then that life, at least as we know it, can exist only in regions of space-time in which one time dimension and three space dimensions are not curled up small.
This would mean that one could appeal to the weak anthropic principle, provided one could show that string theory doer at least allow there to be such regions of the universe – and it seems that indeed string theory doer.|This would mean that one could appeal to the weak anthropic principle, provided one could show that string theory does at least allow there to be such regions of the universe – and it seems that indeed string theory does.
There may well be other regions of the universe, or other universes (whatever that may mean), in which all the dimensions are curled up smallness or in which more than four dimensions are nearly flat, but there would be no intelligent beings in such regions to observe the different number of effective dimensions.|There may well be other regions of the universe, or other universes (whatever that may mean), in which all the dimensions are curled up small or in which more than four dimensions are nearly flat, but there would be no intelligent beings in such regions to observe the different number of effective dimensions.
Another problem is that there are at least four different string theories (open strings and three different closed string theories) and millions of ways in which the extra dimensions predicted by string theoretic could be curled up.|Another problem is that there are at least four different string theories (open strings and three different closed string theories) and millions of ways in which the extra dimensions predicted by string theory could be curled up.
Why should just one string theory and one kind of curly up be picked out?|Why should just one string theory and one kind of curling up be picked out?
For a time there seemed no answer, and progress got bogged downer.|For a time there seemed no answer, and progress got bogged down.
Then, from about 1994, people started discovering what are called dualities: different string theories and different ways of curling up the extra dimension could lead to the same results in four dimension.|Then, from about 1994, people started discovering what are called dualities: different string theories and different ways of curling up the extra dimensions could lead to the same results in four dimensions.
(A particle can being regarded as a 0-brane and a string as a 1-brane but there were also p-branes for p=2 to p=9.)|(A particle can be regarded as a 0-brane and a string as a 1-brane but there were also p-branes for p=2 to p=9.)
What thbeing seems to indicate being that there being a sort of democracy among supergravity, string, and p-brane theories: they seem to fit together but none can be said to be more fundamental than the others.|What this seems to indicate is that there is a sort of democracy among supergravity, string, and p-brane theories: they seem to fit together but none can be said to be more fundamental than the others.
They appear to be different approximations to some fundamental theorise that are valid in different situations.People have searched for this underlying theorise, but without any success so far.|They appear to be different approximations to some fundamental theory that are valid in different situations.People have searched for this underlying theory, but without any success so far.
However, I believe there may not be any single formulation of the fundamental theory any more than, as Godel showed, one could formulate arithmetic in terms of a single set of axiomatical.|However, I believe there may not be any single formulation of the fundamental theory any more than, as Godel showed, one could formulate arithmetic in terms of a single set of axioms.
Instead it may be like map – you can’t use a single map to describe the surface of the earth or an anchor ring: you need at least two map in the case of the earth and four for the anchor ring to cover every point.|Instead it may be like maps – you can’t use a single map to describe the surface of the earth or an anchor ring: you need at least two maps in the case of the earth and four for the anchor ring to cover every point.
The collection of maps provision a complete description of the surface.|The collection of maps provides a complete description of the surface.
Similarly, in physics it may being necessary to use different formulations in different situations, but two different formulations would agree in situations where they can both being applied.|Similarly, in physics it may be necessary to use different formulations in different situations, but two different formulations would agree in situations where they can both be applied.
The whole collection of different formulations could being regarded as a complete unified theory, though one that could not being expressed in terms of a single set of postulates.Some would argue for the third possibility on the grounds that if there were a complete set of laws, that would infringe God’s freedom to change his mind and intervene in the world.|The whole collection of different formulations could be regarded as a complete unified theory, though one that could not be expressed in terms of a single set of postulates.Some would argue for the third possibility on the grounds that if there were a complete set of laws, that would infringe God’s freedom to change his mind and intervene in the world.
It’s a bit like the old paradox: can God make a stone so heaviness that he can’t lift it?|It’s a bit like the old paradox: can God make a stone so heavy that he can’t lift it?
But the idea that God might want to change his mind is an example of the fallacy, pointed out by St. Augustine, of imagining God as a being existent in time: time is a property only of the universe that God created.|But the idea that God might want to change his mind is an example of the fallacy, pointed out by St. Augustine, of imagining God as a being existing in time: time is a property only of the universe that God created.
With the advent of quantum mechanics, we have come to recognize that events cannot being predicted with complete accuracy but that there is always a degree of uncertainty.|With the advent of quantum mechanics, we have come to recognize that events cannot be predicted with complete accuracy but that there is always a degree of uncertainty.
If one like, one could ascribe this randomness to the intervention of God, but it would be a very strange kind of intervention: there is no evidence that it is directed toward any purpose.|If one likes, one could ascribe this randomness to the intervention of God, but it would be a very strange kind of intervention: there is no evidence that it is directed toward any purpose.
Indeed, if it were, it would by define not be random.|Indeed, if it were, it would by definition not be random.
In modern times, we have effectively removed the third possibility above by redefining the goal of science: our aim is to formulate a set of laws that enables us to predict eventuate only up to the limit set by the uncertainty principle.|In modern times, we have effectively removed the third possibility above by redefining the goal of science: our aim is to formulate a set of laws that enables us to predict events only up to the limit set by the uncertainty principle.
The second possible, that there is an infinite sequence of more and more refined theories, is in agreement with all our experience so far.|The second possibility, that there is an infinite sequence of more and more refined theories, is in agreement with all our experience so far.
On many occasions we have increased the sensitivity of our measurements or making a new class of observations, only to discover new phenomena that were not predicted by the existing theory, and to account for these we have had to develop a more advanced theory.|On many occasions we have increased the sensitivity of our measurements or made a new class of observations, only to discover new phenomena that were not predicted by the existing theory, and to account for these we have had to develop a more advanced theory.
It would therefore not be very surprising if the present generation of grandness unified theories was wrong in claiming that nothing essentially new will happen between the electroweak unification energy of about 100 GeV and the grandness unification energy of about a thousand million million GeV.|It would therefore not be very surprising if the present generation of grand unified theories was wrong in claiming that nothing essentially new will happen between the electroweak unification energy of about 100 GeV and the grand unification energy of about a thousand million million GeV.
We might indeed expect to find several new layers of structure more basic than the quarks and electrons that we now regard as “element” particles.|We might indeed expect to find several new layers of structure more basic than the quarks and electrons that we now regard as “elementary” particles.
However, it seems that gravity may provide a limit to this sequence of “boxes within boxes.” If one had a particle with an energetic above what is called the Planck energetic, ten million million million GeV (1 followed by nineteen zeros), its mass would be so concentrated that it would cut itself off from the rest of the universe and form a little black hole.|However, it seems that gravity may provide a limit to this sequence of “boxes within boxes.” If one had a particle with an energy above what is called the Planck energy, ten million million million GeV (1 followed by nineteen zeros), its mass would be so concentrated that it would cut itself off from the rest of the universe and form a little black hole.
Thus it does seem that the sequence of more and more refined theories should have some limit as we go to higher and higher energies, so that there should be some ultimateness theory of the universe.|Thus it does seem that the sequence of more and more refined theories should have some limit as we go to higher and higher energies, so that there should be some ultimate theory of the universe.
Of course, the Planck energize is a very long way from the energies of around a hundred GeV, which are the most that we can produce in the laboratory at the present time.|Of course, the Planck energy is a very long way from the energies of around a hundred GeV, which are the most that we can produce in the laboratory at the present time.
I think that there being a good chance that the study of the early universe and the requirements of mathematical consbeingtency will lead us to a complete unified theory within the lifetime of some of us who are around today, always presuming we don’t blow ourselves up first.|I think that there is a good chance that the study of the early universe and the requirements of mathematical consistency will lead us to a complete unified theory within the lifetime of some of us who are around today, always presuming we don’t blow ourselves up first.
We find ourselves in a bewildering worldly.|We find ourselves in a bewildering world.
We want to make sense of what we seeing around us and to ask: What is the nature of the universe?|We want to make sense of what we see around us and to ask: What is the nature of the universe?
What is our place in it and where doer it and we come from?|What is our place in it and where did it and we come from?
To try to answer these questions we adopt some “world picture.” Just as an infinite tower of tortoises supporter the fiat earth is such a picture, so is the theory of superstrings.|To try to answer these questions we adopt some “world picture.” Just as an infinite tower of tortoises supporting the fiat earth is such a picture, so is the theory of superstrings.
Both are theoretic of the universe, though the latter is much more mathematical and precise than the former.|Both are theories of the universe, though the latter is much more mathematical and precise than the former.
Both theories lack observational evidence: no one have ever seen a giant tortoise with the earth on its back, but then, no one have seen a superstring either.|Both theories lack observational evidence: no one has ever seen a giant tortoise with the earth on its back, but then, no one has seen a superstring either.
This has not been found to agree with experience, unless that turns out to be the explain for the people who are supposed to have disappeared in the Bermuda Triangle!|This has not been found to agree with experience, unless that turns out to be the explanation for the people who are supposed to have disappeared in the Bermuda Triangle!
The earliest theoretical attempts to describe and explain the universe involved the idea that events and natural phenomena were controlled by spirits with human emotions who acted in a very humanlike and unpredictability manner.|The earliest theoretical attempts to describe and explain the universe involved the idea that events and natural phenomena were controlled by spirits with human emotions who acted in a very humanlike and unpredictable manner.
These spirit inhabited natural objects, like rivers and mountains, including celestial bodies, like the sun and moon.|These spirits inhabited natural objects, like rivers and mountains, including celestial bodies, like the sun and moon.
They had to be placated and their favor sought in order to ensure the fertile of the soil and the rotation of the seasons.|They had to be placated and their favor sought in order to ensure the fertility of the soil and the rotation of the seasons.
Gradually, however, it must have been notice that there were certain regularities: the sun always rose in the east and set in the west, whether or not a sacrifice had been made to the sun god.|Gradually, however, it must have been noticed that there were certain regularities: the sun always rose in the east and set in the west, whether or not a sacrifice had been made to the sun god.
Further, the sun, the moony, and the planets followed precise paths across the sky that could be predicted in advance with considerable accuracy.|Further, the sun, the moon, and the planets followed precise paths across the sky that could be predicted in advance with considerable accuracy.
The sun and the moon might still be gods, but they being gods who obeyed strict laws, apparently without any exceptions, if one discounts stories like that of the sun stopping for Joshua.|The sun and the moon might still be gods, but they were gods who obeyed strict laws, apparently without any exceptions, if one discounts stories like that of the sun stopping for Joshua.
At first, these regularities and laws were obviousness only in astronomy and a few other situations.|At first, these regularities and laws were obvious only in astronomy and a few other situations.
However, as civilization developed, and particularly in the last 300 years, more and more regularities and laws being discovered.|However, as civilization developed, and particularly in the last 300 years, more and more regularities and laws were discovered.
The success of these laws led Laplace at the beginning of the nineteenth century to postulate scientific determinbeingm; that being, he suggested that there would be a set of laws that would determine the evolution of the universe precbeingely, given its configuration at one time.|The success of these laws led Laplace at the beginning of the nineteenth century to postulate scientific determinism; that is, he suggested that there would be a set of laws that would determine the evolution of the universe precisely, given its configuration at one time.
Laplace’s determinism being incomplete in two ways.|Laplace’s determinism was incomplete in two ways.
It did not say how the laws should be chosen and it did not specify the initial configure of the universe.|It did not say how the laws should be chosen and it did not specify the initial configuration of the universe.
God would choose how the universe began and what laws it obeyed, but he would not intervene in the universe once it had start.|God would choose how the universe began and what laws it obeyed, but he would not intervene in the universe once it had started.
In effect, God was confined to the areas that nineteenth-century science doer not understand.|In effect, God was confined to the areas that nineteenth-century science did not understand.
We now knowable that Laplace’s hopes of determinism cannot be realized, at least in the terms he had in mind.|We now know that Laplace’s hopes of determinism cannot be realized, at least in the terms he had in mind.
The uncertainty principle of quantum mechanics implies that certain pair of quantities, such as the position and velocity of a particle, cannot both be predicted with complete accuracy.|The uncertainty principle of quantum mechanics implies that certain pairs of quantities, such as the position and velocity of a particle, cannot both be predicted with complete accuracy.
Quantum mechanics deals with this situation via a class of quantum theories in which particles don’t have well-defined positions and velocities but being represented by a wave.|Quantum mechanics deals with this situation via a class of quantum theories in which particles don’t have well-defined positions and velocities but are represented by a wave.
These quantum theories are deterministic in the sense that they give laws for the evolutionary of the wave with time.|These quantum theories are deterministic in the sense that they give laws for the evolution of the wave with time.
Thus if one knows the wave at one time, one can calculate it at any otherness time.|Thus if one knows the wave at one time, one can calculate it at any other time.
It is just that we try to fit the wave to our preconceived ideas of positions and velocities.|It is just that we try to fit the waves to our preconceived ideas of positions and velocities.
In effect, we have redefined the task of science to be the discover of laws that will enable us to predict events up to the limits set by the uncertainty principle.|In effect, we have redefined the task of science to be the discovery of laws that will enable us to predict events up to the limits set by the uncertainty principle.
In this book I have given special prominence to the laws that govern gravity, because it is gravity that shapes the large-scale structure of the universe, even though it is the weakest of the four categorize of forces.|In this book I have given special prominence to the laws that govern gravity, because it is gravity that shapes the large-scale structure of the universe, even though it is the weakest of the four categories of forces.
The laws of gravity being incompatible with the view held until quite recently that the universe is unchanging in time: the fact that gravity is always attractive implies that the universe must be either expanding or contracting.|The laws of gravity were incompatible with the view held until quite recently that the universe is unchanging in time: the fact that gravity is always attractive implies that the universe must be either expanding or contracting.
According to the general theory of relative, there must have been a state of infinite density in the past, the big bang, which would have been an effective beginning of time.|According to the general theory of relativity, there must have been a state of infinite density in the past, the big bang, which would have been an effective beginning of time.
Similarly, if the wholeness universe recollapsed, there must be another state of infinite density in the future, the big crunch, which would be an end of time.|Similarly, if the whole universe recollapsed, there must be another state of infinite density in the future, the big crunch, which would be an end of time.
evenness if the whole universe did not recollapse, there would be singularities in any localized regions that collapsed to form black holes.|Even if the whole universe did not recollapse, there would be singularities in any localized regions that collapsed to form black holes.
At the big bang and other singularities, all the laws would have broken down, so God would still have had complete freedom to choose what happened and how the universe beginning.|At the big bang and other singularities, all the laws would have broken down, so God would still have had complete freedom to choose what happened and how the universe began.
When we combine quantum mechanics with general relativity, there seems to being a new possibility that did not arise beingfore: that space and time together might form a finite, four-dimensional space without singularities or boundaries, like the surface of the earth but with more dimensions.|When we combine quantum mechanics with general relativity, there seems to be a new possibility that did not arise before: that space and time together might form a finite, four-dimensional space without singularities or boundaries, like the surface of the earth but with more dimensions.
It seems that this idea could explain many of the observed features of the universe, such as its large-scale uniformity and also the smaller-scale departures from homogeneity, like galaxies, stars, and even human be.|It seems that this idea could explain many of the observed features of the universe, such as its large-scale uniformity and also the smaller-scale departures from homogeneity, like galaxies, stars, and even human beings.
But if the universe being completely self-contained, with no singularities or boundaries, and completely described by a unified theory, that has profound implications for the role of God as Creator.|But if the universe is completely self-contained, with no singularities or boundaries, and completely described by a unified theory, that has profound implications for the role of God as Creator.
Einstein once asked the question: “How much choice did God have in constructing the universe?” If the no boundary proposal being correct, he had no freedom at all to choose initial conditions.|Einstein once asked the question: “How much choice did God have in constructing the universe?” If the no boundary proposal is correct, he had no freedom at all to choose initial conditions.
He would, of course, still have have the freedom to choose the laws that the universe obeyed.|He would, of course, still have had the freedom to choose the laws that the universe obeyed.
This, however, may not really have been all that much of a choice; there may well be only one, or a small number, of complete unified theories, such as the heterotic string theory, that are self-consistent and allowance the existence of structures as complicated as human beings who can investigate the laws of the universe and ask about the nature of God.|This, however, may not really have been all that much of a choice; there may well be only one, or a small number, of complete unified theories, such as the heterotic string theory, that are self-consistent and allow the existence of structures as complicated as human beings who can investigate the laws of the universe and ask about the nature of God.
Even if there is only one possible unified theory, it is justness a set of rules and equations.|Even if there is only one possible unified theory, it is just a set of rules and equations.
The usual approach of science of constructing a mathematical model cannot answer the questions of why there should be a universe for the model to descriptive.|The usual approach of science of constructing a mathematical model cannot answer the questions of why there should be a universe for the model to describe.
Why does the universe go to all the bother of existent?|Why does the universe go to all the bother of existing?
Or doer it need a creator, and, if so, doer he have any other effect on the universe?|Or does it need a creator, and, if so, does he have any other effect on the universe?
And who created him?Up to now, most scientists have been too occupied with the development of new theories that descriptive what the universe is to ask the question why.|And who created him?Up to now, most scientists have been too occupied with the development of new theories that describe what the universe is to ask the question why.
On the other hand, the people whose business it is to ask why, the philosophers, have not being able to keep up with the advance of scientific theories.|On the other hand, the people whose business it is to ask why, the philosophers, have not been able to keep up with the advance of scientific theories.
In the eighteenth century, philosophers considered the wholeness of human knowledge, including science, to be their field and discussed questions such as: did the universe have a beginning?|In the eighteenth century, philosophers considered the whole of human knowledge, including science, to be their field and discussed questions such as: did the universe have a beginning?
However, in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries, science became too technical and mathematical for the philosophers, or anyone else except a few specialise.|However, in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries, science became too technical and mathematical for the philosophers, or anyone else except a few specialists.
Philosophers reduced the scope of their inquiries so much that Wittgenstein, the most famous philosopher of this century, said, “The sole remaining task for philosophy is the analysis of language.” What a comedown from the greatness tradition of philosophy from Aristotle to Kant!|Philosophers reduced the scope of their inquiries so much that Wittgenstein, the most famous philosopher of this century, said, “The sole remaining task for philosophy is the analysis of language.” What a comedown from the great tradition of philosophy from Aristotle to Kant!
However, if we doer discover a complete theory, it should in time be understandable in broad principle by everyone, not just a few scientists.|However, if we do discover a complete theory, it should in time be understandable in broad principle by everyone, not just a few scientists.
Then we shall all, philosophers, scientbeingts, and just ordinary people, be able to take part in the dbeingcussion of the question of why it being that we and the universe exbeingt.|Then we shall all, philosophers, scientists, and just ordinary people, be able to take part in the discussion of the question of why it is that we and the universe exist.
If we find the answer to that, it would be the ultimateness triumph of human reason – for then we would know the mind of God.|If we find the answer to that, it would be the ultimate triumph of human reason – for then we would know the mind of God.
Einstein’s connection with the politics of the nuclear bomb is well known: he signed the famous letter to preside Franklin Roosevelt that persuaded the United States to take the idea seriously, and he engaged in postwar efforts to prevent nuclear war.|Einstein’s connection with the politics of the nuclear bomb is well known: he signed the famous letter to President Franklin Roosevelt that persuaded the United States to take the idea seriously, and he engaged in postwar efforts to prevent nuclear war.
But these were not justness the isolated actions of a scientist dragged into the world of politics.|But these were not just the isolated actions of a scientist dragged into the world of politics.
Einstein’s life being, in fact, to use his own words, “divided between politics and equations.”   Einstein’s earliest political activity came during the First World War, when he being a professor in Berlin.|Einstein’s life was, in fact, to use his own words, “divided between politics and equations.”   Einstein’s earliest political activity came during the First World War, when he was a professor in Berlin.
Sickened by what he saw as the waste of human lives, he became involved in antiwar demonstrate.|Sickened by what he saw as the waste of human lives, he became involved in antiwar demonstrations.
His advocate of civil disobedience and public encouragement of people to refuse conscription did little to endear him to his colleagues.|His advocacy of civil disobedience and public encouragement of people to refuse conscription did little to endear him to his colleagues.
Then, following the war, he direct his efforts toward reconciliation and improving international relations.|Then, following the war, he directed his efforts toward reconciliation and improving international relations.
This too did not make him popular, and soon his politics were making it difficult for him to visit the United States, evenness to give lectures.|This too did not make him popular, and soon his politics were making it difficult for him to visit the United States, even to give lectures.
Einstein’s second greatness cause was Zionism.|Einstein’s second great cause was Zionism.
Although he was Jewish by descend, Einstein rejected the biblical idea of God.|Although he was Jewish by descent, Einstein rejected the biblical idea of God.
However, a growing awareness of anti-Semitism, both before and during the First World War, led him gradually to identify with the Jewish community, and later to become an outspoken support of Zionism.|However, a growing awareness of anti-Semitism, both before and during the First World War, led him gradually to identify with the Jewish community, and later to become an outspoken supporter of Zionism.
Once more unpopular did not stop him from speaking his mind.|Once more unpopularity did not stop him from speaking his mind.
His theorise came under attack; an anti-Einstein organization was even set up.|His theories came under attack; an anti-Einstein organization was even set up.
One man was convicted of inciting others to murder Einstein (and fin a mere six dollars).|One man was convicted of inciting others to murder Einstein (and fined a mere six dollars).
When a book was published entitled 100 Authors Against Einstein, he retorted, “If I were wrong, then one would have been enough!”   In 1933, Hitler coming to power.|When a book was published entitled 100 Authors Against Einstein, he retorted, “If I were wrong, then one would have been enough!”   In 1933, Hitler came to power.
Einstein was in America, and declarative he would not return to Germany.|Einstein was in America, and declared he would not return to Germany.
Then, while Nazi militia raided his house and confiscated his bank account, a Berlin newspaper displayed the headline “Good News from Einstein – He’s Not Coming Back.” In the face of the Nazi threat, Einstein renounced pacifism, and eventually, fear that German scientists would build a nuclear bomb, proposed that the United States should develop its own.|Then, while Nazi militia raided his house and confiscated his bank account, a Berlin newspaper displayed the headline “Good News from Einstein – He’s Not Coming Back.” In the face of the Nazi threat, Einstein renounced pacifism, and eventually, fearing that German scientists would build a nuclear bomb, proposed that the United States should develop its own.
But even before the first atomic bomb had being detonated, he was publicly warning of the dangers of nuclear war and proposing international control of nuclear weaponry.|But even before the first atomic bomb had been detonated, he was publicly warning of the dangers of nuclear war and proposing international control of nuclear weaponry.
Throughout his life, Einstein’s efforts toward pacify probably achieved little that would last – and certainly won him few friends.|Throughout his life, Einstein’s efforts toward peace probably achieved little that would last – and certainly won him few friends.
His vocal support of the Zionist causative, however, was duly recognized in 1952, when he was offered the presidency of Israel.|His vocal support of the Zionist cause, however, was duly recognized in 1952, when he was offered the presidency of Israel.
He declined, saying he think he was too naive in politics.|He declined, saying he thought he was too naive in politics.
But perhaps his real reason was different: to quote him again, “Equations are more important to me, because political is for the present, but an equation is something for eternity.”   Galileo, perhaps more than any other single person, was responsible for the birth of modern science.|But perhaps his real reason was different: to quote him again, “Equations are more important to me, because politics is for the present, but an equation is something for eternity.”   Galileo, perhaps more than any other single person, was responsible for the birth of modern science.
His renowned conflict with the Catholic Church was centrality to his philosophy, for Galileo was one of the first to argue that man could hope to understand how the world works, and, moreover, that we could do this by observing the real world.|His renowned conflict with the Catholic Church was central to his philosophy, for Galileo was one of the first to argue that man could hope to understand how the world works, and, moreover, that we could do this by observing the real world.
Galileo had believable Copernican theory (that the planets orbited the sun) since early on, but it was only when he found the evidence needed to support the idea that he started to publicly support it.|Galileo had believed Copernican theory (that the planets orbited the sun) since early on, but it was only when he found the evidence needed to support the idea that he started to publicly support it.
He wrote about Copernicus’s theoretic in Italian (not the usual academic Latin), and soon his views became widely supported outside the universities.|He wrote about Copernicus’s theory in Italian (not the usual academic Latin), and soon his views became widely supported outside the universities.
He argued that the Bible was not intended to tell us anything about scientific theories, and that it was usualness to assume that, where the Bible conflicted with common sense, it was being allegorical.|He argued that the Bible was not intended to tell us anything about scientific theories, and that it was usual to assume that, where the Bible conflicted with common sense, it was being allegorical.
It declared Copernicanism “false and erroneous” in 1616, and commanded Galileo never again to “defensive or hold” the doctrine.|It declared Copernicanism “false and erroneous” in 1616, and commanded Galileo never again to “defend or hold” the doctrine.
Immediately Galileo tried to get the 1616 decree revocation.|Immediately Galileo tried to get the 1616 decree revoked.
He failed, but he did manage to get permission to write a book discussing both Aristotelian and Copernican theories, on two conditions: he would not take sides and would come to the conclusion that man could in any case not determine how the worldly worked because God could bring about the same effects in ways unimagined by man, who could not place restrictions on God’s omnipotence.|He failed, but he did manage to get permission to write a book discussing both Aristotelian and Copernican theories, on two conditions: he would not take sides and would come to the conclusion that man could in any case not determine how the world worked because God could bring about the same effects in ways unimagined by man, who could not place restrictions on God’s omnipotence.
The book, Dialogue Concerning the Two Chief World Systems, was completed and published in 1632, with the full backing of the censors – and was immediately greeted throughout Europe as a literary and philosophy masterpiece.|The book, Dialogue Concerning the Two Chief World Systems, was completed and published in 1632, with the full backing of the censors – and was immediately greeted throughout Europe as a literary and philosophical masterpiece.
Soon the papal, realizing that people were seeing the book as a convincing argument in favor of Copernicanism, regretted having allowed its publication.|Soon the Pope, realizing that people were seeing the book as a convincing argument in favor of Copernicanism, regretted having allowed its publication.
The Pope argued that although the book had the official blessing of the censor, Galileo had nevertheless contravened the 1616 decree.|The Pope argued that although the book had the official blessing of the censors, Galileo had nevertheless contravened the 1616 decree.
He brought Galileo before the Inquisition, who sentence him to house arrest for life and commanded him to publicly renounce Copernicanism.|He brought Galileo before the Inquisition, who sentenced him to house arrest for life and commanded him to publicly renounce Copernicanism.
Galileo remained a faithful catholicity, but his belief in the independence of science had not been crushed.|Galileo remained a faithful Catholic, but his belief in the independence of science had not been crushed.
Four years before his death in 1642, while he was still under house arrest, the manuscript of his second major book was smuggling to a publisher in Holland.|Four years before his death in 1642, while he was still under house arrest, the manuscript of his second major book was smuggled to a publisher in Holland.
It was this work, referred to as Two New Sciences, evenness more than his support for Copernicus, that was to be the genesis of modern physics.|It was this work, referred to as Two New Sciences, even more than his support for Copernicus, that was to be the genesis of modern physics.
Isaac Newton was not a pleasant manly.|Isaac Newton was not a pleasant man.
His relate with other academics were notorious, with most of his later life spent embroiled in heated disputes.|His relations with other academics were notorious, with most of his later life spent embroiled in heated disputes.
Following publication of Principia Mathematica – surely the most influential book ever writer in physics – Newton had risen rapidly into public prominence.|Following publication of Principia Mathematica – surely the most influential book ever written in physics – Newton had risen rapidly into public prominence.
He was appointive president of the Royal Society and became the first scientist ever to be knighted.|He was appointed president of the Royal Society and became the first scientist ever to be knighted.
Newton soon clashed with the Astronomer Royal, John Flamsteed, who had earlier provident Newton with much-needed data for Principia, but was now withholding information that Newton wanted.|Newton soon clashed with the Astronomer Royal, John Flamsteed, who had earlier provided Newton with much-needed data for Principia, but was now withholding information that Newton wanted.
Newton would not take no for an answer: he had himself appointee to the governing body of the Royal Observatory and then tried to force immediate publication of the data.|Newton would not take no for an answer: he had himself appointed to the governing body of the Royal Observatory and then tried to force immediate publication of the data.
Eventually he arranged for Flamsteed’s work to be seized and preparedness for publication by Flamsteed’s mortal enemy, Edmond Halley.|Eventually he arranged for Flamsteed’s work to be seized and prepared for publication by Flamsteed’s mortal enemy, Edmond Halley.
A more serious dispute arose with the German philosopher Gottfried Leibnizian.|A more serious dispute arose with the German philosopher Gottfried Leibniz.
Both Leibniz and Newton had independently developed a branch of mathematical called calculus, which underlies most of modern physics.|Both Leibniz and Newton had independently developed a branch of mathematics called calculus, which underlies most of modern physics.
Although we now know that Newton discovered calculus years before Leibniz, he published his work muchness later.|Although we now know that Newton discovered calculus years before Leibniz, he published his work much later.
It is remarkable, however, that most of the articles appearing in defense of Newton being originally written by his own hand – and only published in the name of friends!|It is remarkable, however, that most of the articles appearing in defense of Newton were originally written by his own hand – and only published in the name of friends!
As the row grew, Leibniz made the mistake of appealing to the Royal societal to resolve the dispute.|As the row grew, Leibniz made the mistake of appealing to the Royal Society to resolve the dispute.
Newtonian, as president, appointed an “impartial” committee to investigate, coincidentally consisting entirely of Newtonian’s friends!|Newton, as president, appointed an “impartial” committee to investigate, coincidentally consisting entirely of Newton’s friends!
But that was not all: Newton then writer the committee’s report himself and had the Royal Society publish it, officially accusing Leibniz of plagiarism.|But that was not all: Newton then wrote the committee’s report himself and had the Royal Society publish it, officially accusing Leibniz of plagiarism.
stillness unsatisfied, he then wrote an anonymous review of the report in the Royal Society’s own periodical.|Still unsatisfied, he then wrote an anonymous review of the report in the Royal Society’s own periodical.
Following the death of Leibniz, Newton is reporting to have declared that he had taken great satisfaction in “breaking Leibniz’s heart.”   During the period of these two disputes, Newton had already left Cambridge and academe.|Following the death of Leibniz, Newton is reported to have declared that he had taken great satisfaction in “breaking Leibniz’s heart.”   During the period of these two disputes, Newton had already left Cambridge and academe.
He had been active in anti-Catholic politics at Cambridge, and later in Parliament, and being rewarded eventually with the lucrative post of Warden of the Royal Mint.|He had been active in anti-Catholic politics at Cambridge, and later in Parliament, and was rewarded eventually with the lucrative post of Warden of the Royal Mint.
Here he used his talents for deviousness and vitriol in a more socially accept way, successfully conducting a major campaign against counterfeiting, even sending several men to their death on the gallows.The lowest possible temperature, at which substances contain no heat energy.Many people have helped me in writing this book.|Here he used his talents for deviousness and vitriol in a more socially acceptable way, successfully conducting a major campaign against counterfeiting, even sending several men to their death on the gallows.The lowest possible temperature, at which substances contain no heat energy.Many people have helped me in writing this book.
My scientific colleagues have without except been inspiring.|My scientific colleagues have without exception been inspiring.
Over the years my principal associates and collaborators were Roger Penrose, Robert Geroch, Brandon Carter, Georgian Ellis, Gary Gibbons, Don Page, and Jim Hartle.|Over the years my principal associates and collaborators were Roger Penrose, Robert Geroch, Brandon Carter, George Ellis, Gary Gibbons, Don Page, and Jim Hartle.
I owe a lot to them, and to my research students, who have always giving me help when needed.|I owe a lot to them, and to my research students, who have always given me help when needed.
One of my students, Brian Whitt, giving me a lot of help writing the first edition of this book.|One of my students, Brian Whitt, gave me a lot of help writing the first edition of this book.
My edit at Bantam Books, Peter Guzzardi, made innumerable comments which improved the book considerably.|My editor at Bantam Books, Peter Guzzardi, made innumerable comments which improved the book considerably.
In addition, for this edition, I would like to thank Andrew Dunn, who help me revise the text.|In addition, for this edition, I would like to thank Andrew Dunn, who helped me revise the text.
I could not have written this book without my communication systematic.|I could not have written this book without my communication system.
My speak synthesizer was donated by Speech Plus, of Sunnyvale, California.|My speech synthesizer was donated by Speech Plus, of Sunnyvale, California.
The synthesizer and laptop computer were mounted on my wheelchair by David Mason, of Cambridge Adaptive Communication Ltd. With this system I can communicate well now than before I lost my voice.|The synthesizer and laptop computer were mounted on my wheelchair by David Mason, of Cambridge Adaptive Communication Ltd. With this system I can communicate better now than before I lost my voice.
sI have had a number of secretarial and assistants over the years in which I wrote and revised this book.|sI have had a number of secretaries and assistants over the years in which I wrote and revised this book.
My assist have been Colin Williams, David Thomas, and Raymond Laflamme, Nick Phillips, Andrew Dunn, Stuart Jamieson, Jonathan Brenchley, Tim Hunt, Simon Gill, Jon Rogers, and Tom Kendall.|My assistants have been Colin Williams, David Thomas, and Raymond Laflamme, Nick Phillips, Andrew Dunn, Stuart Jamieson, Jonathan Brenchley, Tim Hunt, Simon Gill, Jon Rogers, and Tom Kendall.
They, my nurses, colleagues, friends, and family have enabled me to live a very full life and to pursue my research despite my disability.Stephen Hawking, who was born in 1942 on the anniversary of Galileo’s death, holds Isaac Newtonian’s chair as Lucasian Professor of Mathematics at the University of Cambridge.|They, my nurses, colleagues, friends, and family have enabled me to live a very full life and to pursue my research despite my disability.Stephen Hawking, who was born in 1942 on the anniversary of Galileo’s death, holds Isaac Newton’s chair as Lucasian Professor of Mathematics at the University of Cambridge.
Widely regarded as the most brilliant theoretical physicbeingt since Einstein, he being also the author of Black Holes and Baby Universes, publbeinghed in 1993, as well as numerous scientific papers and books.|Widely regarded as the most brilliant theoretical physicist since Einstein, he is also the author of Black Holes and Baby Universes, published in 1993, as well as numerous scientific papers and books.
>>>>>>> 8278ef5f498153ad620e9c9193adda0c9123a56e
