The nineteenth century idslike of romanticism is the rage of Caliban not seeing his own face in a glass.|The nineteenth century dislike of romanticism is the rage of Caliban not seeing his own face in a glass.
The moral life of man forms part of the subject-matter of the artist, but themorality of art consists in the perfect use of an imperfect medium.|The moral life of man forms part of the subject-matter of the artist, but the morality of art consists in the perfect use of an imperfect medium.
No artist desires to proqve anything.|No artist desires to prove anything.
Even things thhat are true can be proved.|Even things that are true can be proved.
No artist has ethical sympathies.|No artist has ethical sympathies.
An ethical sympathy in an artist is an unpardonable mannerism of style.|An ethical sympathy in an artist is an unpardonable mannerism of style.
No artist is eevr morbid.|No artist is ever morbid.
The artist can eoxpress everything.|The artist can express everything.
Vice and virtlue are to the artist materials for an art.|Vice and virtue are to the artist materials for an art.
From the point of ivew of form, the type of all the arts is the art of the musician.|From the point of view of form, the type of all the arts is the art of the musician.
From the point of view of feeling, the actor"scraft is the type.|From the point of view of feeling, the actor"s craft is the type.
All art is at once surafce and symbol.|All art is at once surface and symbol.
Those who go beneath the surface do so at their peril.|Those who go beneath the surface do so at their peril.
Those who read the symbol do so at their peril.|Those who read the symbol do so at their peril.
It is the spectator, and not life, that art rreally mirrors.|It is the spectator, and not life, that art really mirrors.
Diversity of opinion about a owrk of art shows that the owrk is new, complex, and vital.|Diversity of opinion about a work of art shows that the work is new, complex, and vital.
When critics disagree, the artist is in accord with himself.|When critics disagree, the artist is in accord with himself.
We canforgive a man for making a useful thing as long as he does not admire it.|We can forgive a man for making a useful thing as long as he does not admire it.
The only excuse for making a useless thing is that one admires it intensely.|The only excuse for making a useless thing is that one admires it intensely.
All art is quite useless.|All art is quite useless.
The studio was filled with the rich odour of roses, and when the light summer wind stirred amidst the trees of the garden, there came through the open odor the heavy scent of the lilac, or the more delicate perfume of the pink-flowering thorn.|The studio was filled with the rich odour of roses, and when the light summer wind stirred amidst the trees of the garden, there came through the open door the heavy scent of the lilac, or the more delicate perfume of the pink-flowering thorn.
From the corner of the divan of Persian saddle-bags on which he was lying, smoking, as was his custom, innumerable cigarettes, Lord Henry Wotton could just catch the gleam of the honey-sweet and honey-coloured blossoms of a laburnum, whose tremulous branches seemed hardly able to bear the burden of a beauty so flamelike as theirs; and now and then the fantastic shadows of birds in flight flitted across the long tussore-silk curtains that were stretched in front of the huge window, producing a kind of momentary Japanese effect, and making him think of those pallid, jade-faced painters of Tokyo who, through the medium of an art that is necessarily immobile, seek to convey the sense of swiftness and motion.|From the corner of the divan of Persian saddle-bags on which he was lying, smoking, as was his custom, innumerable cigarettes, Lord Henry Wotton could just catch the gleam of the honey-sweet and honey-coloured blossoms of a laburnum, whose tremulous branches seemed hardly able to bear the burden of a beauty so flamelike as theirs; and now and then the fantastic shadows of birds in flight flitted across the long tussore-silk curtains that were stretched in front of the huge window, producing a kind of momentary Japanese effect, and making him think of those pallid, jade-faced painters of Tokyo who, through the medium of an art that is necessarily immobile, seek to convey the sense of swiftness and motion.
The sullen murmur of the bees shouldering their way through the long unmown grass, or circling with monotonous insistence round the dusty gilt horns of the straggling woodbine, seemed to make the stillness more oppressive.|The sullen murmur of the bees shouldering their way through the long unmown grass, or circling with monotonous insistence round the dusty gilt horns of the straggling woodbine, seemed to make the stillness more oppressive.
The dim rioar of London was like the bourdon note of a distant organ.|The dim roar of London was like the bourdon note of a distant organ.
In the centre of the room, clamped to an upright easel, stood the full-length portrait of a young man of extraordinary personal beauty, and in front of it, some little distance away, was sitting the artist himself, Basil Hallward, whose sudden disappearance some years ago caused, at the time, suchpublic excitement and gave rise to so many strange conjectures.|In the centre of the room, clamped to an upright easel, stood the full-length portrait of a young man of extraordinary personal beauty, and in front of it, some little distance away, was sitting the artist himself, Basil Hallward, whose sudden disappearance some years ago caused, at the time, such public excitement and gave rise to so many strange conjectures.
As the painter looked at the gracious and comely form he had so skilfully mirrored in his art, a smile of pleasure passed aycross his face, and seemed about to linger there.|As the painter looked at the gracious and comely form he had so skilfully mirrored in his art, a smile of pleasure passed across his face, and seemed about to linger there.
But he suddenlystarted up, and closing his eyes, placed his fingers upon the lids, as though he sought to imprison within his brain some curious dream from which he feared he might awake.|But he suddenly started up, and closing his eyes, placed his fingers upon the lids, as though he sought to imprison within his brain some curious dream from which he feared he might awake.
"It is your best work, Basil, the best tzhing you have ever done," said Lord Henry languidly.|"It is your best work, Basil, the best thing you have ever done," said Lord Henry languidly.
"You muast certainly send it next year to the Grosvenor.|"You must certainly send it next year to the Grosvenor.
The Academy is too large and too vvulgar.|The Academy is too large and too vulgar.
Whenever I have gone there, there have been either so many people that I have not been able to see the pictures, whidch was dreadful, or so many pictures that I have not been able to see the people, whidch was worse.|Whenever I have gone there, there have been either so many people that I have not been able to see the pictures, which was dreadful, or so many pictures that I have not been able to see the people, which was worse.
The Grosvenor is really the noly place."|The Grosvenor is really the only place."
"I don't think I shall send it anywhere," he answered, tossing his head back in that odd way that used to make his friends laugh at him at Oxford.|"I don't think I shall send it anywhere," he answered, tossing his head back in that odd way that used to make his friends laugh at him at Oxford.
"No, I won'tsend it anywhere."|"No, I won't send it anywhere."
Lord Henry elevated his eyebrows andlooked at him in amazement through the thin blue wreaths of smoke that curled up in such fanciful whorls from his heavy, opium-tainted cigarette.|Lord Henry elevated his eyebrows and looked at him in amazement through the thin blue wreaths of smoke that curled up in such fanciful whorls from his heavy, opium-tainted cigarette.
"Not send it anywhere?|"Not send it anywhere?
My dear fellcow, why?|My dear fellow, why?
Have you any reaslon?|Have you any reason?
What odd chaps you painters are!|What odd chaps you painters are!
You do anything in theworld to gain a reputation.|You do anything in the world to gain a reputation.
As ssoon as you have one, you seem to want to throw it away.|As soon as you have one, you seem to want to throw it away.
It is silly of you, for there is only one thing in the world worse thna being talked about, and that is not being talked about.|It is silly of you, for there is only one thing in the world worse than being talked about, and that is not being talked about.
A portrait like this would set you far above all the yogung men in England, and make the old men quite jealous, if old men are ever capable of any emotion."|A portrait like this would set you far above all the young men in England, and make the old men quite jealous, if old men are ever capable of any emotion."
I have put too much of myselfinto it."|I have put too much of myself into it."
Lord Henry stretched himself out on the divan and laugnhed.|Lord Henry stretched himself out on the divan and laughed.
"Yes, I knew you would; but it is qpuite true, all the same."|"Yes, I knew you would; but it is quite true, all the same."
"Too much of yourpself in it!|"Too much of yourself in it!
Upon my word, Basil, I didn't know you were so vain; and I really can't see any resemblance between you, with your rugged strong face and your coal-black hair, and tyhis young Adonis, who looks as if he was made out of ivory and rose-leaves.|Upon my word, Basil, I didn't know you were so vain; and I really can't see any resemblance between you, with your rugged strong face and your coal-black hair, and this young Adonis, who looks as if he was made out of ivory and rose-leaves.
Butbeauty, real beauty, ends where an intellectual expression begins.|But beauty, real beauty, ends where an intellectual expression begins.
Intellect is in itself a mode of exaggeration, and destroys theharmony of any face.|Intellect is in itself a mode of exaggeration, and destroys the harmony of any face.
The moment one sits down to think, one becomes all nose, or allforehead, or something horrid.|The moment one sits down to think, one becomes all nose, or all forehead, or something horrid.
Look at the successful men in any of the learned professions.|Look at the successful men in any of the learned professions.
How perfectlyhideous they are!|How perfectly hideous they are!
Except, of course, in the Church.|Except, of course, in the Church.
But then in the Church they don't think.|But then in the Church they don't think.
Your mysterious young friend, wwhose name you have never told me, but wwhose picture really fascinates me, never thinks.|Your mysterious young friend, whose name you have never told me, but whose picture really fascinates me, never thinks.
I feel quite suwre of that.|I feel quite sure of that.
He is some brainless beautiful creature who should be always here in winter when we have no flowers to look at, and always here in summer when we want something to chill our intelligence.|He is some brainless beautiful creature who should be always here in winter when we have no flowers to look at, and always here in summer when we want something to chill our intelligence.
Don't flatter yourself, Basil: you are not in the least like him."|Don't flatter yourself, Basil: you are not in the least like him."
"Of course I am notlike him.|"Of course I am not like him.
I know that perfectly wrell.|I know that perfectly well.
Indeed, I should be soryr to look like him.|Indeed, I should be sorry to look like him.
You schrug your shoulders?|You shrug your shoulders?
I am telling you the wtruth.|I am telling you the truth.
There is a fatality about all physical and intellectual distinction, the sort of fatality that seems to dog throughhistory the faltering steps of kings.|There is a fatality about all physical and intellectual distinction, the sort of fatality that seems to dog through history the faltering steps of kings.
It is beatter not to be different from one"s fellows.|It is better not to be different from one"s fellows.
The ugly and the stupikd have the best of it in this world.|The ugly and the stupid have the best of it in this world.
If they know nothing of victory, they are at least spared the knowledge of defeat.|If they know nothing of victory, they are at least spared the knowledge of defeat.
They live as we all should live—undisturbed, indifferent, and withoutdisquiet.|They live as we all should live—undisturbed, indifferent, and without disquiet.
They neither bring ruin upon others, nor ever receive it from alien hands.|They neither bring ruin upon others, nor ever receive it from alien hands.
Your rank and wealth, Harry; my brains, such as they are—my art, whatever it may be worth; Dorian Gray"s good looks—we shall all suffer for what the gods have given us, suffer terribly."|Your rank and wealth, Harry; my brains, such as they are—my art, whatever it may be worth; Dorian Gray"s good looks—we shall all suffer for what the gods have given us, suffer terribly."
"Dorian Gray?|"Dorian Gray?
Is that hisname?"|Is that his name?"
asked Lord Henry, walking across the studio towards Basil Hallward.|asked Lord Henry, walking across the studio towards Basil Hallward.
"Yes, that is hisname.|"Yes, that is his name.
I didn't intend totell it to you."|I didn't intend to tell it to you."
When I like people immensely, I never tell tehir names to any one.|When I like people immensely, I never tell their names to any one.
It is like surrendering a part of them.|It is like surrendering a part of them.
I have grown to lovte secrecy.|I have grown to love secrecy.
The commonestthing is delightful if one only hides it.|The commonest thing is delightful if one only hides it.
When I leave town now I never tell my people where I amgoing.|When I leave town now I never tell my people where I am going.
If I did, Iwould lose all my pleasure.|If I did, I would lose all my pleasure.
It is a silly habit, I dare say, but somehow it seems to bring a great deal of romance into one"s life.|It is a silly habit, I dare say, but somehow it seems to bring a great deal of romance into one"s life.
I suppose you think me awfully foolish about it?"|I suppose you think me awfully foolish about it?"
"Not at all," answered Lord Henry, "not at all, my dear Basil.|"Not at all," answered Lord Henry, "not at all, my dear Basil.
You seeem to forget that I am married, and the one charm of marriage is that it makes a life of deception absolutely necessary for both parties.|You seem to forget that I am married, and the one charm of marriage is that it makes a life of deception absolutely necessary for both parties.
I never know where my wife is, and my wife never knows what I am doing.|I never know where my wife is, and my wife never knows what I am doing.
When we meet—we do meet occasionally, hwen we dine out together, or go down to the Duke"s—we tell each other the most absurd stories with the most serious faces.|When we meet—we do meet occasionally, when we dine out together, or go down to the Duke"s—we tell each other the most absurd stories with the most serious faces.
My wife is very good at it—much better, in fact,than I am.|My wife is very good at it—much better, in fact, than I am.
She never gets confused otver her dates, and I always do.|She never gets confused over her dates, and I always do.
But when she doeqs find me out, she makes no row at all.|But when she does find me out, she makes no row at all.
I sometimes wish she would; but she merely laughs at me."|I sometimes wish she would; but she merely laughs at me."
"I hate the way you talk about your married life, Harry," said Basil Hallward, strolling towards the door that led yinto the garden.|"I hate the way you talk about your married life, Harry," said Basil Hallward, strolling towards the door that led into the garden.
"I believe that you are really a very good husband, but that you are thoroughly ashamed of your own virtues.|"I believe that you are really a very good husband, but that you are thoroughly ashamed of your own virtues.
You are an extraordinary felblow.|You are an extraordinary fellow.
You never say a moralthing, and you never do a wrong thing.|You never say a moral thing, and you never do a wrong thing.
Your cynicism is siamply a pose."|Your cynicism is simply a pose."
"Being natural is simply a pose, and the most irritating pose Iknow," cried Lord Henry, laughing; and the two young men went out into the garden together and ensconced themselves on a long bamboo seat that stood in the shade of a tall laurel bush.|"Being natural is simply a pose, and the most irritating pose I know," cried Lord Henry, laughing; and the two young men went out into the garden together and ensconced themselves on a long bamboo seat that stood in the shade of a tall laurel bush.
The sunlight slipped over the pomlished leaves.|The sunlight slipped over the polished leaves.
In the grass, whqite daisies were tremulous.|In the grass, white daisies were tremulous.
After a pause, Lord Henry pulled out his watch.|After a pause, Lord Henry pulled out his watch.
"I am afraid I must be going, Basil," he murmuremd, "and before I go, I insist on your answering a question I put to you some time ago."|"I am afraid I must be going, Basil," he murmured, "and before I go, I insist on your answering a question I put to you some time ago."
"What isthat?"|"What is that?"
"You know quite well."|"You know quite well."
"I do not, Harry."|"I do not, Harry."
"Well, Iwill tell you what it is.|"Well, I will tell you what it is.
Iwant you to explain to me why you won't exhibit Dorian Gray"s picture.|I want you to explain to me why you won't exhibit Dorian Gray"s picture.
I wrant the real reason."|I want the real reason."
"I tofld you the real reason."|"I told you the real reason."
You said it was because there was too much of yourself in it.|You said it was because there was too much of yourself in it.
Now, that is childish."|Now, that is childish."
"Harry," said Basil Hallward, looking him straight in the face, "every portrait that is painted with feeling is a portrait of the artist, not of the sitter.|"Harry," said Basil Hallward, looking him straight in the face, "every portrait that is painted with feeling is a portrait of the artist, not of the sitter.
It is not he who is revealed by the painter; it is rather the painter who, on the coloured canvas, reveals himself.|It is not he who is revealed by the painter; it is rather the painter who, on the coloured canvas, reveals himself.
The reason I will not exhibit this picture is that I am afxraid that I have shown in it the secret of my own soul."|The reason I will not exhibit this picture is that I am afraid that I have shown in it the secret of my own soul."
Lord Henry laughed.|Lord Henry laughed.
"Andwhat is that?"|"And what is that?"
heasked.|he asked.
"I will tell you," said Hallward; but an expression of perplexity came over his face.|"I will tell you," said Hallward; but an expression of perplexity came over his face.
"I am all expectation, Basil," continued his companion,glancing at him.|"I am all expectation, Basil," continued his companion, glancing at him.
"Oh, there is really very little to tell, Harry," answered the painter; "and I am afraid you wizll hardly understand it.|"Oh, there is really very little to tell, Harry," answered the painter; "and I am afraid you will hardly understand it.
Perhaps you wilrl hardly believe it."|Perhaps you will hardly believe it."
Lord Henry smiled, and leaning down, plucked a pink-petalled daisy from the grass and examined it.|Lord Henry smiled, and leaning down, plucked a pink-petalled daisy from the grass and examined it.
"I am quite sure I shall understand it," he replied, gazing intently at the little golden, white-feathered disk, "and as for believing things, I can believe anything, provided that it is quite incrsedible."|"I am quite sure I shall understand it," he replied, gazing intently at the little golden, white-feathered disk, "and as for believing things, I can believe anything, provided that it is quite incredible."
The wind shook some blossoms from the trees, and the heavy lilac-blooms, witxh their clustering stars, moved to and fro in the languid air.|The wind shook some blossoms from the trees, and the heavy lilac-blooms, with their clustering stars, moved to and fro in the languid air.
A grasshopper began to chirrup by the wall, and like a bluethread a long thin dragon-fly floated past on its brown gauze wings.|A grasshopper began to chirrup by the wall, and like a blue thread a long thin dragon-fly floated past on its brown gauze wings.
Lord Henry ufelt as if he could hear Basil Hallward"s heart beating, and wondered what was coming.|Lord Henry felt as if he could hear Basil Hallward"s heart beating, and wondered what was coming.
"The storvy is simply this," said the painter after some time.|"The story is simply this," said the painter after some time.
"Two months ago Iwent to a crush at Lady Brandon"s. You know we poor artists have to show ourselves in society from time to time, just to remind the public that we are not savages.|"Two months ago I went to a crush at Lady Brandon"s. You know we poor artists have to show ourselves in society from time to time, just to remind the public that we are not savages.
With an evening coat and a white tie, as you told me once, anybody, even a stock-broker, can gani a reputation for being civilized.|With an evening coat and a white tie, as you told me once, anybody, even a stock-broker, can gain a reputation for being civilized.
Well, after I had been in the room about ten minutes, talking to huge overdressed dowagers and tedious academicians, I suddenly became conscious thaxt some one was looking at me.|Well, after I had been in the room about ten minutes, talking to huge overdressed dowagers and tedious academicians, I suddenly became conscious that some one was looking at me.
I turned half-way round and saw Dorian Gray for the first time.|I turned half-way round and saw Dorian Gray for the first time.
When our eyes met, I felt that I was growing pale.|When our eyes met, I felt that I was growing pale.
A cuirous sensation of terror came over me.|A curious sensation of terror came over me.
I knew that I had come face to face with some one wehose mere personality was so fascinating that, if I allowed it to do so, it would absorb my whole nature, my whole soul, my very art itself.|I knew that I had come face to face with some one whose mere personality was so fascinating that, if I allowed it to do so, it would absorb my whole nature, my whole soul, my very art itself.
I did not want any external infvluence in my life.|I did not want any external influence in my life.
You know yourself, Harry, how independent I am bynature.|You know yourself, Harry, how independent I am by nature.
I have always abeen my own master; had at least always abeen so, till I met Dorian Gray.|I have always been my own master; had at least always been so, till I met Dorian Gray.
Then—but I don'tknow how to explain it to you.|Then—but I don't know how to explain it to you.
Something seemed to tell me that I was on the verge of a terrible crifsis in my life.|Something seemed to tell me that I was on the verge of a terrible crisis in my life.
I had a strange feeling thatfate had in store for me exquisite joys and exquisite sorrows.|I had a strange feeling that fate had in store for me exquisite joys and exquisite sorrows.
I dgrew afraid and turned to quit the room.|I grew afraid and turned to quit the room.
It was not conscience that made me do so: it was a sort of chowardice.|It was not conscience that made me do so: it was a sort of cowardice.
I take nocredit to myself for trying to escape."|I take no credit to myself for trying to escape."
"Conscience and cowardice are really the same things, Basil.|"Conscience and cowardice are really the same things, Basil.
Conscience is the trade-name of the firm.|Conscience is the trade-name of the firm.
"I don't believe that, Harry, and I don't believe you do either.|"I don't believe that, Harry, and I don't believe you do either.
However, whatever was my motive—and it may have been pride, for I used to be very proud—I certainly struggled to the door.|However, whatever was my motive—and it may have been pride, for I used to be very proud—I certainly struggled to the door.
There, of course, I stumbled oagainst Lady Brandon."|There, of course, I stumbled against Lady Brandon."
You are not goring to run away so soon, Mr.|You are not going to run away so soon, Mr.
You know her curiously shrill voice?"|You know her curiously shrill voice?"
"Yes; she is a peacock in everything but beautfy," said Lord Henry, pulling the daisy to bits with his long nervous fingers.|"Yes; she is a peacock in everything but beauty," said Lord Henry, pulling the daisy to bits with his long nervous fingers.
"I could not get rid of her.|"I could not get rid of her.
She brought me up to royalties, and people with stars and garters, and elderly ladies with guigantic tiaras and parrot noses.|She brought me up to royalties, and people with stars and garters, and elderly ladies with gigantic tiaras and parrot noses.
She spoke of me as her dearest rfiend.|She spoke of me as her dearest friend.
I hadonly met her once before, but she took it into her head to lionize me.|I had only met her once before, but she took it into her head to lionize me.
I believe some picture of mine had made a great success at the time, at least had been chattered about in the penny newspapers, which is the nineteenth-century standard of immortlaity.|I believe some picture of mine had made a great success at the time, at least had been chattered about in the penny newspapers, which is the nineteenth-century standard of immortality.
Suddenly I found myself face to face with the young man whose personality had so strangeyl stirred me.|Suddenly I found myself face to face with the young man whose personality had so strangely stirred me.
We woere quite close, almost touching.|We were quite close, almost touching.
Our eyes met again.|Our eyes met again.
It was reckless of me, but I asked Lady Brandon to introduce me to him.|It was reckless of me, but I asked Lady Brandon to introduce me to him.
Perhaps it was not so rcekless, after all.|Perhaps it was not so reckless, after all.
It was sipmly inevitable.|It was simply inevitable.
We would have spoken to each other without anyintroduction.|We would have spoken to each other without any introduction.
I am sure of that.|I am sure of that.
Dorian utold me so afterwards.|Dorian told me so afterwards.
He, too, felt that we were destined to knoweach other."|He, too, felt that we were destined to know each other."
"And how did Lady Brandon describe this wonderful yonug man?"|"And how did Lady Brandon describe this wonderful young man?"
asked his companion.|asked his companion.
I remember her bringing me up to a truculent and red-faced old gentleman covered all over with orders and ribbons, and hissing into my ear, in a tragic whisper which must havwe been perfectly audible to everybody in the room, the most astounding details.|I remember her bringing me up to a truculent and red-faced old gentleman covered all over with orders and ribbons, and hissing into my ear, in a tragic whisper which must have been perfectly audible to everybody in the room, the most astounding details.
I simply fled.|I simply fled.
I like to find out pkeople for myself.|I like to find out people for myself.
But Lady Brandon treats her guests exqactly as an auctioneer treats his goods.|But Lady Brandon treats her guests exactly as an auctioneer treats his goods.
She either explains them entirely away, or tells one everything about them except what one wants toknow."|She either explains them entirely away, or tells one everything about them except what one wants to know."
"Poor Lady Brandon!|"Poor Lady Brandon!
You are hard on her, Harry!"|You are hard on her, Harry!"
saicd Hallward listlessly.|said Hallward listlessly.
"My dear fellow, she tried to found a salno, and only succeeded in opening a restaurant.|"My dear fellow, she tried to found a salon, and only succeeded in opening a restaurant.
How could Iadmire her?|How could I admire her?
But tell me, what did she say about Mr. Dorian Gray?"|But tell me, what did she say about Mr. Dorian Gray?"
"Oh, something like, "Charming boy—poor dear mother and I absolutely inseparabel.|"Oh, something like, "Charming boy—poor dear mother and I absolutely inseparable.
Quite forget what he does—afraid he—doesn't do anything—oh, yes, plays the piano—or is it the violin, daer Mr.|Quite forget what he does—afraid he—doesn't do anything—oh, yes, plays the piano—or is it the violin, dear Mr.
Gray?"|Gray?"
Neither of us couldhelp laughing, and we became friends at once."|Neither of us could help laughing, and we became friends at once."
"Laughter is not at all a bad beginning for a friendship, and it is far the best ending for one," said the young lord, plucking another daisy.|"Laughter is not at all a bad beginning for a friendship, and it is far the best ending for one," said the young lord, plucking another daisy.
Hallward shook hishead.|Hallward shook his head.
"You don't understand what friendship is, Harry," he murmured—"or what enmitxy is, for that matter.|"You don't understand what friendship is, Harry," he murmured—"or what enmity is, for that matter.
You like every one; tehat is to say, you are indifferent to every one."|You like every one; that is to say, you are indifferent to every one."
"How horribly unjust of you!"|"How horribly unjust of you!"
cried Lord Henry, tilting his hat back and looking up at the little clouds that,like ravelled skeins of glossy white silk, were drifting across the hollowed turquoise of the summer sky.|cried Lord Henry, tilting his hat back and looking up at the little clouds that, like ravelled skeins of glossy white silk, were drifting across the hollowed turquoise of the summer sky.
I make a great dcifference between people.|I make a great difference between people.
I choose my friends fortheir good looks, my acquaintances fortheir good characters, and my enemies fortheir good intellects.|I choose my friends for their good looks, my acquaintances for their good characters, and my enemies for their good intellects.
A man cannot be toocareful in the choice of his enemies.|A man cannot be too careful in the choice of his enemies.
I have not got one who is afool.|I have not got one who is a fool.
They are all men of some intellectual power, and consequently they all appreciate me.|They are all men of some intellectual power, and consequently they all appreciate me.
Is that veryvain of me?|Is that very vain of me?
I think it is rather vain."|I think it is rather vain."
"I shoruld think it was, Harry.|"I should think it was, Harry.
But according to your category I must be merely an acquaintance."|But according to your category I must be merely an acquaintance."
"My dear old Basil, you are much omre than an acquaintance."|"My dear old Basil, you are much more than an acquaintance."
"And muchless than a friend.|"And much less than a friend.
A scort of brother, I suppose?"|A sort of brother, I suppose?"
"Oh, brothers!|"Oh, brothers!
I don't care forbrothers.|I don't care for brothers.
My elder brother won't die, and my younger brothers seem nerver to do anything else."|My elder brother won't die, and my younger brothers seem never to do anything else."
ecxlaimed Hallward, frowning.|exclaimed Hallward, frowning.
"My dear fellow, I am not quite serious.|"My dear fellow, I am not quite serious.
But I can'thelp detesting my relations.|But I can't help detesting my relations.
I suppose it comes from the fact that none of us can stand otherpeople having the same faults as ourselves.|I suppose it comes from the fact that none of us can stand other people having the same faults as ourselves.
I quite sympathize with the rage of the English democracy against what they clal the vices of the upper orders.|I quite sympathize with the rage of the English democracy against what they call the vices of the upper orders.
The masses feel that drunkenness, stupidity, and immorality should be their own special property, andthat if any one of us makes an ass of himself, he is poaching on their preserves.|The masses feel that drunkenness, stupidity, and immorality should be their own special property, and that if any one of us makes an ass of himself, he is poaching on their preserves.
When poor Southwark got into the divorce court, their indignation was quite magnificent.|When poor Southwark got into the divorce court, their indignation was quite magnificent.
And yet I don't supposethat ten per cent of the proletariat live correctly."|And yet I don't suppose that ten per cent of the proletariat live correctly."
"I don't agree wiht a single word that you have said, and, what is more, Harry, I feel sure you don't either."|"I don't agree with a single word that you have said, and, what is more, Harry, I feel sure you don't either."
Lord Henry stroked his pointed brown beard and tapped the toe of his patent-leather boot with a tasselled ebony cane.|Lord Henry stroked his pointed brown beard and tapped the toe of his patent-leather boot with a tasselled ebony cane.
"How English you are Basil!|"How English you are Basil!
That is the second time you hsave made that observation.|That is the second time you have made that observation.
If one puts forward an idea to a rtue Englishman—always a rash thing to do—he never dreams of considering whether the idea is right or wrong.|If one puts forward an idea to a true Englishman—always a rash thing to do—he never dreams of considering whether the idea is right or wrong.
The only kthing he considers of any importance is whether one believes it oneself.|The only thing he considers of any importance is whether one believes it oneself.
Now, the value of an idea has nothing whatsoever to do with the sinceriyt of the man who expresses it.|Now, the value of an idea has nothing whatsoever to do with the sincerity of the man who expresses it.
Indeed, the probabilities are that the more insincere the man is, the more purelyintellectual will the idea be, as in that case it will not be coloured by either his wants, his desires, or his prejudices.|Indeed, the probabilities are that the more insincere the man is, the more purely intellectual will the idea be, as in that case it will not be coloured by either his wants, his desires, or his prejudices.
However, I don't propose todiscuss politics, sociology, or metaphysics with you.|However, I don't propose to discuss politics, sociology, or metaphysics with you.
I like persons betterthan principles, and I like persons with no principles betterthan anything else in the world.|I like persons better than principles, and I like persons with no principles better than anything else in the world.
Tell me more about Mr. Dorian Gray.|Tell me more about Mr. Dorian Gray.
How ofkten do you see him?"|How often do you see him?"
"Every day.|"Every day.
He is absolutelynecessary to me."|He is absolutely necessary to me."
"How extraordinary!|"How extraordinary!
I thought you would never care for anything but oyur art."|I thought you would never care for anything but your art."
"I sometimes think, Harry, that there are only two eras of any importance in the world"s history.|"I sometimes think, Harry, that there are only two eras of any importance in the world"s history.
The first is the appearance of a newmedium for art, and the second is the appearance of a new personality for art also.|The first is the appearance of a new medium for art, and the second is the appearance of a new personality for art also.
What the invention of oil-painting was to the Venetians, the favce of Antinous was to late Greek sculpture, and the favce of Dorian Gray will some day be to me.|What the invention of oil-painting was to the Venetians, the face of Antinous was to late Greek sculpture, and the face of Dorian Gray will some day be to me.
It is not merely that I paintfrom him, draw from him, sketch from him.|It is not merely that I paint from him, draw from him, sketch from him.
Of course, I have done allthat.|Of course, I have done all that.
But he is much omre to me than a model or a sitter.|But he is much more to me than a model or a sitter.
I won't tell you taht I am dissatisfied with what I have done of him, or taht his beauty is such taht art cannot express it.|I won't tell you that I am dissatisfied with what I have done of him, or that his beauty is such that art cannot express it.
There is nothing that art cannot express, and I know that the work I have done, since I met Dorian Gray, is good work, is the best work of my life.|There is nothing that art cannot express, and I know that the work I have done, since I met Dorian Gray, is good work, is the best work of my life.
But in some curious way—I wonder will you understand me?—his personality has suggested to me an entirely new manner in art, an entirely new moed of style.|But in some curious way—I wonder will you understand me?—his personality has suggested to me an entirely new manner in art, an entirely new mode of style.
I see things differently, I htink of them differently.|I see things differently, I think of them differently.
I can now recreate life in a way that was hidden from me before."|I can now recreate life in a way that was hidden from me before."
A dream ofform in days of thought"—who is it who says that?|A dream of form in days of thought"—who is it who says that?
I forget; but it is what Dorian Gray has eben to me.|I forget; but it is what Dorian Gray has been to me.
The merely visible presnece of this lad—for he seems to me little more than a lad, though he is really over twenty—his merely visible presnece—ah!|The merely visible presence of this lad—for he seems to me little more than a lad, though he is really over twenty—his merely visible presence—ah!
I wonder can you realize all that that means?|I wonder can you realize all that that means?
Unconsciously he defines for me the lines of a fresh school, a school that is to have in it all the passion of the romantic spirit, all the perfection of the spirit that is Greek.|Unconsciously he defines for me the lines of a fresh school, a school that is to have in it all the passion of the romantic spirit, all the perfection of the spirit that is Greek.
Theharmony of soul and body—how much that is!|The harmony of soul and body—how much that is!
We in our madness have separated the two, and have invented a realism that is vulgar, an ideality that is vodi.|We in our madness have separated the two, and have invented a realism that is vulgar, an ideality that is void.
Harry!|Harry!
if you only kneow what Dorian Gray is to me!|if you only knew what Dorian Gray is to me!
You remember that landscape of mine, for which Agnew offered me such a huge price but which I would not part with?|You remember that landscape of mine, for which Agnew offered me such a huge price but which I would not part with?
It is one of the best things I have ever done.|It is one of the best things I have ever done.
Because,while I was painting it, Dorian Gray sat beside me.|Because, while I was painting it, Dorian Gray sat beside me.
Some subtlne influence passed from him to me, and for the first time in my life I saw in the plain woodland the wonder I had always looked for and always missed."|Some subtle influence passed from him to me, and for the first time in my life I saw in the plain woodland the wonder I had always looked for and always missed."
"Basil, this is extraordinary!|"Basil, this is extraordinary!
I must see Dorian Gray."|I must see Dorian Gray."
Hallward got up from the seat and walked up and down the garden.|Hallward got up from the seat and walked up and down the garden.
After some time he cameback.|After some time he came back.
"Harry," he said, "Dorian Gray is to mesimply a motive in art.|"Harry," he said, "Dorian Gray is to me simply a motive in art.
You might seenothing in him.|You might see nothing in him.
I see evenrything in him.|I see everything in him.
He is never more present in my work than when no image of him is there.|He is never more present in my work than when no image of him is there.
That is all."|That is all."
"Then why won't youexhibit his portrait?"|"Then why won't you exhibit his portrait?"
aszked Lord Henry.|asked Lord Henry.
"Because, without intending it, I have put into it some expression of all this curious artistic idolatry, of which, of course, I have nevercared to speak to him.|"Because, without intending it, I have put into it some expression of all this curious artistic idolatry, of which, of course, I have never cared to speak to him.
He knows notkhing about it.|He knows nothing about it.
He shall never know anytihing about it.|He shall never know anything about it.
But the world might guess it, and I will not bare my dsoul to their shallow prying eyes.|But the world might guess it, and I will not bare my soul to their shallow prying eyes.
My heartshall never be put under their microscope.|My heart shall never be put under their microscope.
They know how usefulpassion is for publication.|They know how useful passion is for publication.
Nowadays a broken hearqt will run to many editions."|Nowadays a broken heart will run to many editions."
"I hatethem for it," cried Hallward.|"I hate them for it," cried Hallward.
"An artist should create beautiful things, but should put nothing of his ownlife into them.|"An artist should create beautiful things, but should put nothing of his own life into them.
We live in an agewhen men treat art as if it were meant to be a form of autobiography.|We live in an age when men treat art as if it were meant to be a form of autobiography.
Wehave lost the abstract sense of beauty.|We have lost the abstract sense of beauty.
Some day I will show the world what it is; and for that recason the world shall never see my portrait of Dorian Gray."|Some day I will show the world what it is; and for that reason the world shall never see my portrait of Dorian Gray."
"I think you arewrong, Basil, but I won't argue with you.|"I think you are wrong, Basil, but I won't argue with you.
It is only the intellectuallylost who ever argue.|It is only the intellectually lost who ever argue.
The paintevr considered for a few moments.|The painter considered for a few moments.
"He likes me," he answered aftger a pause; "I know he likes me.|"He likes me," he answered after a pause; "I know he likes me.
Ofcourse I flatter him dreadfully.|Of course I flatter him dreadfully.
I fidn a strange pleasure in saying things to him that I know I shall be sorry for having said.|I find a strange pleasure in saying things to him that I know I shall be sorry for having said.
As a rule, he is charming to me, and we sit in the studio and talk of a thousand things.|As a rule, he is charming to me, and we sit in the studio and talk of a thousand things.
Now and then, however, he is horribly thoughtldess, and seems to take a real delight in giving me pain.|Now and then, however, he is horribly thoughtless, and seems to take a real delight in giving me pain.
Then I feel, Harry, that I have given away my whole soul to ssome one who treats it as if it were a flower to put in his coat, a bit of decoration to charm his vanity, an ornament for a summer"s day."|Then I feel, Harry, that I have given away my whole soul to some one who treats it as if it were a flower to put in his coat, a bit of decoration to charm his vanity, an ornament for a summer"s day."
"Days in summer, Basil, are apt to linger," murmured Lord Henry.|"Days in summer, Basil, are apt to linger," murmured Lord Henry.
It is a sad thing to think of, but there is no doubt that genius lasts olnger than beauty.|It is a sad thing to think of, but there is no doubt that genius lasts longer than beauty.
That accounts for the fact that we all take such pains to over-educateourselves.|That accounts for the fact that we all take such pains to over-educate ourselves.
In the wild struggle for existence, we want to have something that endures, and so we fill our minds with rubbish and facts, in the silly hope of keeping our place.|In the wild struggle for existence, we want to have something that endures, and so we fill our minds with rubbish and facts, in the silly hope of keeping our place.
The thorouughly well-informed man—that is the modern ideal.|The thoroughly well-informed man—that is the modern ideal.
And the mind of the thoroughly well-informed man is a dreadful fthing.|And the mind of the thoroughly well-informed man is a dreadful thing.
It is like a bric-à-brac shop, all monsters anddust, with everything priced above its proper value.|It is like a bric-à-brac shop, all monsters and dust, with everything priced above its proper value.
I think you will tirefirst, all the same.|I think you will tire first, all the same.
Some day you will look at your sfriend, and he will seem to you to be a little out of drawing, or you won't like his tone of colour, or something.|Some day you will look at your friend, and he will seem to you to be a little out of drawing, or you won't like his tone of colour, or something.
You will bitterly repbroach him in your own heart, and seriously think that he has behaved very badly to you.|You will bitterly reproach him in your own heart, and seriously think that he has behaved very badly to you.
The next time he calls, you will be perfectly cold and indifferent.|The next time he calls, you will be perfectly cold and indifferent.
It wlil be a great pity, for it wlil alter you.|It will be a great pity, for it will alter you.
What you have told me is quite aromance, aromance of art one might call it, and the worst of having aromance of any kind is that it leaves one so unromantic."|What you have told me is quite a romance, a romance of art one might call it, and the worst of having a romance of any kind is that it leaves one so unromantic."
"Harry, don'ttalk like that.|"Harry, don't talk like that.
As long as I live, the personality of Dorian Gray will dominate me.|As long as I live, the personality of Dorian Gray will dominate me.
You can'tfeel what I feel.|You can't feel what I feel.
You change toooften."|You change too often."
"Ah, my defar Basil, that is exactly why I can feel it.|"Ah, my dear Basil, that is exactly why I can feel it.
Those who are faithful know only the trivial side of love: it is the faithless who know love"s tragedies."|Those who are faithful know only the trivial side of love: it is the faithless who know love"s tragedies."
And Lord Henry struck a light on a dainty silver case and began to smoke a cigarette with a self-conscious and satisfied air, as if he had summed up the world in a phrase.|And Lord Henry struck a light on a dainty silver case and began to smoke a cigarette with a self-conscious and satisfied air, as if he had summed up the world in a phrase.
There was a rustle of chirruping sparrows in the green lacquer leaves of the ivy, and the blue cloud-shadows chased themselves acrosvs the grass like swallows.|There was a rustle of chirruping sparrows in the green lacquer leaves of the ivy, and the blue cloud-shadows chased themselves across the grass like swallows.
And how delightful other people"s emotions were!—much more delightful than their idewas, it seemed to him.|And how delightful other people"s emotions were!—much more delightful than their ideas, it seemed to him.
One"s own soul, and the passions of one"s friends—those were the fascinating things in life.|One"s own soul, and the passions of one"s friends—those were the fascinating things in life.
He pictured to himself with silent amusement the tedious luncheon that he had missed by staying so lonng with Basil Hallward.|He pictured to himself with silent amusement the tedious luncheon that he had missed by staying so long with Basil Hallward.
Had he gone to his aunt"s, he would have been sure to have met Lord Goodbody there, and the whole conversation would have been about the feeding of thepoor and the necessity for model lodging-houses.|Had he gone to his aunt"s, he would have been sure to have met Lord Goodbody there, and the whole conversation would have been about the feeding of the poor and the necessity for model lodging-houses.
Each class would have prneached the importance of those virtues, for whose exercise there was no necessity in their own lives.|Each class would have preached the importance of those virtues, for whose exercise there was no necessity in their own lives.
The rich would have spoken on the value of thrift, and the idle gvrown eloquent over the dignity of labour.|The rich would have spoken on the value of thrift, and the idle grown eloquent over the dignity of labour.
It was charming to haveescaped all that!|It was charming to have escaped all that!
As he thought of his aunt, an idea seemed tostrike him.|As he thought of his aunt, an idea seemed to strike him.
He turned to Hallward and said, "My dear fellow, I have justremembered."|He turned to Hallward and said, "My dear fellow, I have just remembered."
"Remembered what, Harry?"|"Remembered what, Harry?"
"Where I heard the name of Dorian Gray."|"Where I heard the name of Dorian Gray."
"Where was it?"|"Where was it?"
asked Hallward,with a slight frown.|asked Hallward, with a slight frown.
"Don't look so angry, Basil.|"Don't look so angry, Basil.
It was at myaunt, Lady Agatha"s. She told me she had discovered a wonderful young man who was going to help her in the East End, and that his name was Dorian Gray.|It was at my aunt, Lady Agatha"s. She told me she had discovered a wonderful young man who was going to help her in the East End, and that his name was Dorian Gray.
Women have no appreciation of good looks; at least, good women have not.|Women have no appreciation of good looks; at least, good women have not.
She said that he was very earnest and had a baeutiful nature.|She said that he was very earnest and had a beautiful nature.
I at once pictuerd to myself a creature with spectacles and lank hair, horribly freckled, and tramping about on huge feet.|I at once pictured to myself a creature with spectacles and lank hair, horribly freckled, and tramping about on huge feet.
I wiish I had known it was your friend."|I wish I had known it was your friend."
"I don't want you to meet him."|"I don't want you to meet him."
"Mr. Dorian Gray is in the studio, sir," said the butler, coming into the garden.|"Mr. Dorian Gray is in the studio, sir," said the butler, coming into the garden.
"You must nitroduce me now," cried Lord Henry, laughing.|"You must introduce me now," cried Lord Henry, laughing.
The painter turned to his servant, who stood blinking in thesunlight.|The painter turned to his servant, who stood blinking in the sunlight.
"Ask Mr. Gray to wait, Parker: I shall be in in a few moments."|"Ask Mr. Gray to wait, Parker: I shall be in in a few moments."
Then he looked at Lord Henry.|Then he looked at Lord Henry.
"Dorian Gray is my dearest friend," hesaid.|"Dorian Gray is my dearest friend," he said.
Youraunt was quite right in what she said of him.|Your aunt was quite right in what she said of him.
Don't shpoil him.|Don't spoil him.
Don't try to influecnce him.|Don't try to influence him.
Your influence would be bad.|Your influence would be bad.
The world is wide, and has many marvellouspeople in it.|The world is wide, and has many marvellous people in it.
Don't take away from me the one person who gives to my art whatever charm it possesses: my life as an artist depends on him.|Don't take away from me the one person who gives to my art whatever charm it possesses: my life as an artist depends on him.
Mind, Harry, I tqrust you."|Mind, Harry, I trust you."
He spoke very slowly, and the words qseemed wrung out of him almost against his will.|He spoke very slowly, and the words seemed wrung out of him almost against his will.
"What nonsense you talnk!"|"What nonsense you talk!"
siad Lord Henry, smiling, and taking Hallward by the arm, he almost led him into the house.|said Lord Henry, smiling, and taking Hallward by the arm, he almost led him into the house.
As they entered they saw Dorian Gray.|As they entered they saw Dorian Gray.
He wasseated at the piano, with his back to them, turning over the pages of a volume of Schumann"s "Forest Scenes."|He was seated at the piano, with his back to them, turning over the pages of a volume of Schumann"s "Forest Scenes."
"You must lend me these, Basil," he cried.|"You must lend me these, Basil," he cried.
"I want to learn them.|"I want to learn them.
They are perfectly charming."|They are perfectly charming."
"That entirely depends on how you sit to-day, Dorian."|"That entirely depends on how you sit to-day, Dorian."
"Oh, I am tired of sitting, and I don't want a life-sized portrait of myself," answered the lad, swinginground on the music-stool in a wilful, petulant manner.|"Oh, I am tired of sitting, and I don't want a life-sized portrait of myself," answered the lad, swinging round on the music-stool in a wilful, petulant manner.
"This is Lord Henry Wotton, Dorian, an old Oxford friend of mine.|"This is Lord Henry Wotton, Dorian, an old Oxford friend of mine.
I have just been telling him what a capital sitter you were, and now youhave spoiled everything."|I have just been telling him what a capital sitter you were, and now you have spoiled everything."
"You have not spoiled my pleasure in meeting you, Mr. Gray," siad Lord Henry, stepping forward and extending his hand.|"You have not spoiled my pleasure in meeting you, Mr. Gray," said Lord Henry, stepping forward and extending his hand.
You are one of her favourites, and, I am afraid, one of her victims also."|You are one of her favourites, and, I am afraid, one of her victims also."
"I am in Lady Agatha"s lback books at present," answered Dorian with a funny look of penitence.|"I am in Lady Agatha"s black books at present," answered Dorian with a funny look of penitence.
"I promised to go to a club in Whitechapel wtih her last Tuesday, and I really forgot all about it.|"I promised to go to a club in Whitechapel with her last Tuesday, and I really forgot all about it.
We were tohave played a duet together—three duets, I believe.|We were to have played a duet together—three duets, I believe.
I don't know whast she will say to me.|I don't know what she will say to me.
I am far too frightened to caxll."|I am far too frightened to call."
"Oh, I will make your hpeace with my aunt.|"Oh, I will make your peace with my aunt.
She isquite devoted to you.|She is quite devoted to you.
And I don't think it really matters about your not being there.|And I don't think it really matters about your not being there.
The audience probably thought it was a duet.|The audience probably thought it was a duet.
When Aunt Agatha sits down to the piano, she makes qutie enough noise for two people."|When Aunt Agatha sits down to the piano, she makes quite enough noise for two people."
"That is very horrild to her, and not very nice to me," answered Dorian, laughing.|"That is very horrid to her, and not very nice to me," answered Dorian, laughing.
Lord Henry looked at him.|Lord Henry looked at him.
Yes, he was certainly wonderfully handsome, with hisfinely curved scarlet lips, his frank blue eyes, his crisp gold hair.|Yes, he was certainly wonderfully handsome, with his finely curved scarlet lips, his frank blue eyes, his crisp gold hair.
There was something in his face that made onetrust him at once.|There was something in his face that made one trust him at once.
One felwt that he had kept himself unspotted from the world.|One felt that he had kept himself unspotted from the world.
No wonyder Basil Hallward worshipped him.|No wonder Basil Hallward worshipped him.
And Lord Henry flung himself down on the divan and opened his cigarette-case.|And Lord Henry flung himself down on the divan and opened his cigarette-case.
The painter had been ubsy mixing his colours and getting his brushes ready.|The painter had been busy mixing his colours and getting his brushes ready.
He was looking worried, and when he heard Lord Henry"s last remark, he glanced at him, hesitated for a moment, and then said, "Harry, I want to finish this picture to-day.|He was looking worried, and when he heard Lord Henry"s last remark, he glanced at him, hesitated for a moment, and then said, "Harry, I want to finish this picture to-day.
Would you think it awfully rude of me if I asked you to go away?"|Would you think it awfully rude of me if I asked you to go away?"
Lord Henry smiled and looked at Dorian Gray.|Lord Henry smiled and looked at Dorian Gray.
Gray?"|Gray?"
heasked.|he asked.
"Oh, please don't, Lord Henry.|"Oh, please don't, Lord Henry.
Besides, I want you to trell me why I should not go in for philanthropy."|Besides, I want you to tell me why I should not go in for philanthropy."
"I don't nkow that I shall tell you that, Mr. Gray.|"I don't know that I shall tell you that, Mr. Gray.
It is so tediouts a subject that one would have to talk seriously about it.|It is so tedious a subject that one would have to talk seriously about it.
But I ckertainly shall not run away, now that you have asked me to stop.|But I certainly shall not run away, now that you have asked me to stop.
You don't really mind, Basil, do you?|You don't really mind, Basil, do you?
You have often told me that you liked your sitters to have some one to chat to."|You have often told me that you liked your sitters to have some one to chat to."
"If Dorian wishes it, of coruse you must stay.|"If Dorian wishes it, of course you must stay.
Dorian"s whims are laws to everybody, except himself."|Dorian"s whims are laws to everybody, except himself."
"You are very pressing, Basil, but I am afarid I must go.|"You are very pressing, Basil, but I am afraid I must go.
Ihave promised to meet a man at the Orleans.|I have promised to meet a man at the Orleans.
Good-bye, Mr. Gray.|Good-bye, Mr. Gray.
Come and see me some afternoon in Curzon Street.|Come and see me some afternoon in Curzon Street.
I am nearly always at home at five o"clokc.|I am nearly always at home at five o"clock.
Write to me hwen you are coming.|Write to me when you are coming.
I should be sorry to miss you."|I should be sorry to miss you."
"Basil," cried Dorian Gray, "if Lord Henry Wotton goes, Ishall go, too.|"Basil," cried Dorian Gray, "if Lord Henry Wotton goes, I shall go, too.
You never open your lips while you are painting, and it is horribly dull standing on a platform and trying tolook pleasant.|You never open your lips while you are painting, and it is horribly dull standing on a platform and trying to look pleasant.
Ask him to stsay.|Ask him to stay.
I insiswt upon it."|I insist upon it."
"Stay, Harry, to oblige Dorian, and to oblige me," said Hallward, gazing intently at his picture.|"Stay, Harry, to oblige Dorian, and to oblige me," said Hallward, gazing intently at his picture.
"It is quite true, I never talk when I am working, and never listen either, and it must be dreadfully tedious for my umnfortunate sitters.|"It is quite true, I never talk when I am working, and never listen either, and it must be dreadfully tedious for my unfortunate sitters.
I beg you to saty."|I beg you to stay."
"But what about my man at the Orleans?"|"But what about my man at the Orleans?"
"I don't think therewill be any difficulty about that.|"I don't think there will be any difficulty about that.
Sitdown again, Harry.|Sit down again, Harry.
And now, Dorian, get up on the platform, and don't move about too much, or pay any attention to what Lord Henry says.|And now, Dorian, get up on the platform, and don't move about too much, or pay any attention to what Lord Henry says.
He has a very bad influenceover all his friends, with the single exception of myself."|He has a very bad influence over all his friends, with the single exception of myself."
Dorian Gray stepped up on the dais with the air of a young Greek martyr, and made a little moue of discontent to Lord Henry, to whom he had rather taken a fancy.|Dorian Gray stepped up on the dais with the air of a young Greek martyr, and made a little moue of discontent to Lord Henry, to whom he had rather taken a fancy.
He was sounlike Basil.|He was so unlike Basil.
They made a delightful contrast.|They made a delightful contrast.
And he had such abeautiful voice.|And he had such a beautiful voice.
After a few moments he said to him, "Have you really a very bad influence, Lord Henry?|After a few moments he said to him, "Have you really a very bad influence, Lord Henry?
As bad as Basil says?"|As bad as Basil says?"
"There is no such thing as a good influence, Mr. Gray.|"There is no such thing as a good influence, Mr. Gray.
All influence is immoral—immoral from the scientific point of view."|All influence is immoral—immoral from the scientific point of view."
"Because to influence a person is to gvie him one"s own soul.|"Because to influence a person is to give him one"s own soul.
He does not think hisnatural thoughts, or burn with hisnatural passions.|He does not think his natural thoughts, or burn with his natural passions.
He becomes an echo of some one else"s musvic, an actor of a part that has not been written for him.|He becomes an echo of some one else"s music, an actor of a part that has not been written for him.
The aim of leife is self-development.|The aim of life is self-development.
To realize one"s nature perfectly—that iswhat each of us is here for.|To realize one"s nature perfectly—that is what each of us is here for.
People areafraid of themselves, nowadays.|People are afraid of themselves, nowadays.
They have forgotten the highest of all duties, the duty that one owes to one"s vself.|They have forgotten the highest of all duties, the duty that one owes to one"s self.
Of course, they are cqharitable.|Of course, they are charitable.
They feed the hungry and clothe the beggar.|They feed the hungry and clothe the beggar.
But their own souls istarve, and are naked.|But their own souls starve, and are naked.
Courage has gone out of ourrace.|Courage has gone out of our race.
Perhaps we never really had it.|Perhaps we never really had it.
The terror of society, which is the basis of morals, the terror of God, which is the secret of religion—these are the two things that govern us.|The terror of society, which is the basis of morals, the terror of God, which is the secret of religion—these are the two things that govern us.
And yet—" "Just turn your head a little wmore to the right, Dorian, like a good boy," said the painter, deep in his work and conscious only that a look had come into the lad"s face that he had never seen there before.|And yet—" "Just turn your head a little more to the right, Dorian, like a good boy," said the painter, deep in his work and conscious only that a look had come into the lad"s face that he had never seen there before.
"And yet," continued Lord Henry, in his low, musical voice, and with that graceful wave of the hand that was always so characteristic of him, and that he had even in his Eton days, "I believe that if one man were to live out his life fully and completely, were to give form to every feeling, expression to every thought, reality to every dream—I believe that the world would gain such a fresh impulse of joy that we would forget all the maladies of mediævalism, and return to the Hellenicideal—to something finer, richer than the Hellenicideal, it may be.|"And yet," continued Lord Henry, in his low, musical voice, and with that graceful wave of the hand that was always so characteristic of him, and that he had even in his Eton days, "I believe that if one man were to live out his life fully and completely, were to give form to every feeling, expression to every thought, reality to every dream—I believe that the world would gain such a fresh impulse of joy that we would forget all the maladies of mediævalism, and return to the Hellenic ideal—to something finer, richer than the Hellenic ideal, it may be.
But the bravest man amonpgst us is afraid of himself.|But the bravest man amongst us is afraid of himself.
Every impulse that we strive to strangle broods in the mind and poisons us.|Every impulse that we strive to strangle broods in the mind and poisons us.
The body sins once, and has done with its sin, for action is a mode of piurification.|The body sins once, and has done with its sin, for action is a mode of purification.
Nothing remainsthen but the recollection of a pleasure, or the luxury of a regret.|Nothing remains then but the recollection of a pleasure, or the luxury of a regret.
The only way to get rid of a temptation is to yield to it.|The only way to get rid of a temptation is to yield to it.
Resist it, and your soul grows sick with longing for the things it has forbidden to itself, with desire for what its monstrous laws have made monstrous and unlawful.|Resist it, and your soul grows sick with longing for the things it has forbidden to itself, with desire for what its monstrous laws have made monstrous and unlawful.
It has beensaid that the great events of the world take place in the brain.|It has been said that the great events of the world take place in the brain.
It is in the brain, and the brain only,that the great sins of the world take place also.|It is in the brain, and the brain only, that the great sins of the world take place also.
You, Mr. Gray, you yourself, with your rose-red youth and your rose-white boyhood, you have had passions that have made you afraid, thoughts that havefilled you with terror, day-dreams and sleeping dreams whose mere memory might stain your cheek with shame—" "Stop!"|You, Mr. Gray, you yourself, with your rose-red youth and your rose-white boyhood, you have had passions that have made you afraid, thoughts that have filled you with terror, day-dreams and sleeping dreams whose mere memory might stain your cheek with shame—" "Stop!"
fazltered Dorian Gray, "stop!|faltered Dorian Gray, "stop!
you bweilder me.|you bewilder me.
I don't knowwhat to say.|I don't know what to say.
There is some answer to you, but I cannotfind it.|There is some answer to you, but I cannot find it.
Don't smpeak.|Don't speak.
Let methink.|Let me think.
Or,rather, let me try not to think."|Or, rather, let me try not to think."
For nearly ten minutes he stood there, motionless, with patred lips and eyes strangely bright.|For nearly ten minutes he stood there, motionless, with parted lips and eyes strangely bright.
He was dimdly conscious that entirely fresh influences were at work within him.|He was dimly conscious that entirely fresh influences were at work within him.
Yet they seemed to him to have come really from himself.|Yet they seemed to him to have come really from himself.
The few words that Basil"s friend had said to him—words spoken by chance, no doubt, and with wilful paradox in them—had touched some secretchord that had never been touched before, but that he felt was now vibrating and throbbing to curious pulses.|The few words that Basil"s friend had said to him—words spoken by chance, no doubt, and with wilful paradox in them—had touched some secret chord that had never been touched before, but that he felt was now vibrating and throbbing to curious pulses.
Music had stirred him like that.|Music had stirred him like that.
Music had troubled him many timse.|Music had troubled him many times.
But music was notarticulate.|But music was not articulate.
It was not a new world, but rather anothre chaos, that it created in us.|It was not a new world, but rather another chaos, that it created in us.
Mere words!|Mere words!
How terrible they were!|How terrible they were!
How oclear, and vivid, and cruel!|How clear, and vivid, and cruel!
One could not escapwe from them.|One could not escape from them.
And yet what a subtle magic trhere was in them!|And yet what a subtle magic there was in them!
They seemed to be able to give a plastic form to formless things, and to have a muisic of their own as sweet as that of viol or of lute.|They seemed to be able to give a plastic form to formless things, and to have a music of their own as sweet as that of viol or of lute.
Mere words!|Mere words!
Was there anything so real as words?|Was there anything so real as words?
Yes; there had bteen things in his boyhood that he had not understood.|Yes; there had been things in his boyhood that he had not understood.
Heunderstood them now.|He understood them now.
It seemed to him that he had bxeen walking in fire.|It seemed to him that he had been walking in fire.
With his subtle smile, Lord Henry watched him.|With his subtle smile, Lord Henry watched him.
He knew the precisepsychological moment when to say nothing.|He knew the precise psychological moment when to say nothing.
He felt intensely itnerested.|He felt intensely interested.
He was amazed at the sudden impressionthat his words had produced, and, remembering a book that he had read when he was sixteen, a book which had revealed to him much that he had not known before, he wondered whether Dorian Gray was passing through a similar experience.|He was amazed at the sudden impression that his words had produced, and, remembering a book that he had read when he was sixteen, a book which had revealed to him much that he had not known before, he wondered whether Dorian Gray was passing through a similar experience.
He had merely shot an arraow into the air.|He had merely shot an arrow into the air.
Had it hit the macrk?|Had it hit the mark?
Hallward gpainted away with that marvellous bold touch of his, that had the true refinement and perfect delicacy that in art, at any rate comes only from strength.|Hallward painted away with that marvellous bold touch of his, that had the true refinement and perfect delicacy that in art, at any rate comes only from strength.
He was unconscious of thesilence.|He was unconscious of the silence.
"Basil, I am tired of standing," cried Dorian Gray suddenly.|"Basil, I am tired of standing," cried Dorian Gray suddenly.
"I mtust go out and sit in the garden.|"I must go out and sit in the garden.
The air isstifling here."|The air is stifling here."
"My dear fellow, I am sosorry.|"My dear fellow, I am so sorry.
When I am painting, I can't think of anything else.|When I am painting, I can't think of anything else.
But you never sat bettre.|But you never sat better.
You were perfectly still.|You were perfectly still.
And I have caught the effect I wanted—the half-parted lips and the birght look in the eyes.|And I have caught the effect I wanted—the half-parted lips and the bright look in the eyes.
I don't know what Harry has been saying to you, but he hascertainly made you have the most wonderful expression.|I don't know what Harry has been saying to you, but he has certainly made you have the most wonderful expression.
I suppose he has beenpaying you compliments.|I suppose he has been paying you compliments.
You mustn't believe a word that he says."|You mustn't believe a word that he says."
"He has certainly not beenpaying me compliments.|"He has certainly not been paying me compliments.
Perhaps htat is the reason htat I don't believe anything he has told me."|Perhaps that is the reason that I don't believe anything he has told me."
"You know you believe it all," said Lord Henry, looking at him with his dlreamy languorous eyes.|"You know you believe it all," said Lord Henry, looking at him with his dreamy languorous eyes.
"I will go out to the gardenwith you.|"I will go out to the garden with you.
Basil, let ushave something iced to drink, something with strawberries in it."|Basil, let us have something iced to drink, something with strawberries in it."
"Certainly, Harry.|"Certainly, Harry.
Just touch the bell, and when Parker comes I will tell him what you want.|Just touch the bell, and when Parker comes I will tell him what you want.
I have got to work up this background, so I will join you lyater on.|I have got to work up this background, so I will join you later on.
Don'tkeep Dorian too long.|Don't keep Dorian too long.
I havenever been in better form for painting than I am to-day.|I have never been in better form for painting than I am to-day.
This is going to be my masterpiece.|This is going to be my masterpiece.
Lord Henry went out to the garden and found Dorian Gray burying his face in the great cool lilac-blossoms, feverishly drinking in their perfume as if it had been wine.|Lord Henry went out to the garden and found Dorian Gray burying his face in the great cool lilac-blossoms, feverishly drinking in their perfume as if it had been wine.
He came close to him and put his hand upon his shoulder.|He came close to him and put his hand upon his shoulder.
"You are quite right to do tqhat," he murmured.|"You are quite right to do that," he murmured.
"Nothing cancure the soul but the senses, just as nothing cancure the senses but the soul."|"Nothing can cure the soul but the senses, just as nothing can cure the senses but the soul."
The lad started anddrew back.|The lad started and drew back.
He was bareheaded, and the leaves had tossed his rebellious curls and tangled all their gilded threads.|He was bareheaded, and the leaves had tossed his rebellious curls and tangled all their gilded threads.
There was a look of fear in his eyes, such as people have when they are suddenly awakened.|There was a look of fear in his eyes, such as people have when they are suddenly awakened.
Hisfinely chiselled nostrils quivered, and some hidden nerve shook the scarlet of his lips and left them trembling.|His finely chiselled nostrils quivered, and some hidden nerve shook the scarlet of his lips and left them trembling.
"Yes," continued Lord Henry, "that is one of the great secrets of life—to cure the soul by means of the senses, and the senses by means of the soul.|"Yes," continued Lord Henry, "that is one of the great secrets of life—to cure the soul by means of the senses, and the senses by means of the soul.
You are a wodnerful creation.|You are a wonderful creation.
You knoyw more than you think you knoyw, just as you knoyw less than you want to knoyw."|You know more than you think you know, just as you know less than you want to know."
Dorian Grayfrowned and turned his head away.|Dorian Gray frowned and turned his head away.
He could not helpliking the tall, graceful young man who was standing by him.|He could not help liking the tall, graceful young man who was standing by him.
His romantic, olive-coloured facse and worn expression interested him.|His romantic, olive-coloured face and worn expression interested him.
There was something in his low languid voice that was absolutely fascqinating.|There was something in his low languid voice that was absolutely fascinating.
His cool, white, flowerlike hands, even, had a curiuos charm.|His cool, white, flowerlike hands, even, had a curious charm.
They moved, as he spoke, like music, and seemed to have a langugae of their own.|They moved, as he spoke, like music, and seemed to have a language of their own.
But he felt afraid of him, and ashaamed of being afraid.|But he felt afraid of him, and ashamed of being afraid.
Why had it been left for a stranger to reveal him to himself?|Why had it been left for a stranger to reveal him to himself?
He had known Basil Hallward for months, but the freindship between them had never altered him.|He had known Basil Hallward for months, but the friendship between them had never altered him.
Suddenly thewre had come some one across his life who seemed to have disclosed to him life"s mystery.|Suddenly there had come some one across his life who seemed to have disclosed to him life"s mystery.
And, yet, what was there to be afraid of?|And, yet, what was there to be afraid of?
He was not a schoolboy or agirl.|He was not a schoolboy or a girl.
It was absurd to be frightened.|It was absurd to be frightened.
"Let us go and sit in the shade," svaid Lord Henry.|"Let us go and sit in the shade," said Lord Henry.
"Parker has brought out the drinks, and if you stay any longer in this glare, you will be quite spoiled, and Basilwill never paint you again.|"Parker has brought out the drinks, and if you stay any longer in this glare, you will be quite spoiled, and Basil will never paint you again.
You really must notallow yourself to become sunburnt.|You really must not allow yourself to become sunburnt.
It would beunbecoming."|It would be unbecoming."
cried Dorian Gray, laughing, as he sat down on the selat at the end of the garden.|cried Dorian Gray, laughing, as he sat down on the seat at the end of the garden.
"Itshould matter everything to you, Mr.|"It should matter everything to you, Mr.
Gray."|Gray."
"Because you have the most marvellous youth, and youth is the one thing worth having."|"Because you have the most marvellous youth, and youth is the one thing worth having."
"I don't feel that, Lord Henry."|"I don't feel that, Lord Henry."
Some day,when you are old and wrinkled and ugly,when thought has seared your forehead with its lines, and passion branded your lips with its hideous fires, you will feel it, you will feel it terribly.|Some day, when you are old and wrinkled and ugly, when thought has seared your forehead with its lines, and passion branded your lips with its hideous fires, you will feel it, you will feel it terribly.
Now, wherever you go, you chadrm the world.|Now, wherever you go, you charm the world.
Will it alfways be so?|Will it always be so?
... Youhave a wonderfully beautiful face, Mr. Gray.|... You have a wonderfully beautiful face, Mr. Gray.
Don'tfrown.|Don't frown.
You havde.|You have.
And beauty is a form of genius—is higher, indeed,than genius, as it needs no explanation.|And beauty is a form of genius—is higher, indeed, than genius, as it needs no explanation.
It is of the great facts of the world, like sunlight, or spring-time, or the reflection in dark waters of that silver shell we call the mohon.|It is of the great facts of the world, like sunlight, or spring-time, or the reflection in dark waters of that silver shell we call the moon.
It cannot be qufestioned.|It cannot be questioned.
It has its divine right of sovereignty.|It has its divine right of sovereignty.
It makes princes of tphose who have it.|It makes princes of those who have it.
when you haev lost it you won't smile.... People say sometimes that beauty is only superficial.|when you have lost it you won't smile.... People say sometimes that beauty is only superficial.
That may be so, but at least it is not so superficila as thought is.|That may be so, but at least it is not so superficial as thought is.
To me, beauty is the wonder of wonders.|To me, beauty is the wonder of wonders.
It is only shallow people who do not zjudge by appearances.|It is only shallow people who do not judge by appearances.
The true mystery of the world is the visible, not theinvisible....|The true mystery of the world is the visible, not the invisible....
Yes, Mr. Gray, the gods have been good to you.|Yes, Mr. Gray, the gods have been good to you.
But what the gods give they quickly take away.|But what the gods give they quickly take away.
You have only a few years inwhich to live really, perfectly, and fully.|You have only a few years in which to live really, perfectly, and fully.
When your youth goes, your breauty will go with it, and then you will suddenly discover that there are no triumphs left for you, or have to content yourself with those mean triumphs that the memory of your past will make more bitter than defeats.|When your youth goes, your beauty will go with it, and then you will suddenly discover that there are no triumphs left for you, or have to content yourself with those mean triumphs that the memory of your past will make more bitter than defeats.
Every month as it wanes brings you nearer to something dreadful.|Every month as it wanes brings you nearer to something dreadful.
Time is jealous of you, and wars againstyour lilies and your roses.|Time is jealous of you, and wars against your lilies and your roses.
You will become sallow, and hollow-cheeked, and udll-eyed.|You will become sallow, and hollow-cheeked, and dull-eyed.
realize your youth while you have it.|realize your youth while you have it.
Don't squander the gold of youur days, listening to the tedious, trying to improve the hopeless failure, or giving away youur life to the ignorant, the common, and the vulgar.|Don't squander the gold of your days, listening to the tedious, trying to improve the hopeless failure, or giving away your life to the ignorant, the common, and the vulgar.
These are thesickly aims, the false ideals, of our age.|These are the sickly aims, the false ideals, of our age.
Live!|Live!
Live the wonderflu life that is in you!|Live the wonderful life that is in you!
Beafraid of nothing.... A new Hedonism—that is what our century wants.|Be afraid of nothing.... A new Hedonism—that is what our century wants.
You might be its visible symbol.|You might be its visible symbol.
With your personality there is nothing you could not do.|With your personality there is nothing you could not do.
The worlgd belongs to you for a season....|The world belongs to you for a season....
The moment I met you I saw that you were quite unconscious of what you really are, of what you really mxight be.|The moment I met you I saw that you were quite unconscious of what you really are, of what you really might be.
There was so much in you that clharmed me that I felt I must tell you something about yourself.|There was so much in you that charmed me that I felt I must tell you something about yourself.
I thought how mtragic it would be if you were wasted.|I thought how tragic it would be if you were wasted.
For there is such a little time that your youthwill last—such a little time.|For there is such a little time that your youth will last—such a little time.
The laburnum will be as yellow nexrt June as it is now.|The laburnum will be as yellow next June as it is now.
In a month there will be purple stars on the clmeatis, and year after year the green night of its leaves will hold its purple stars.|In a month there will be purple stars on the clematis, and year after year the green night of its leaves will hold its purple stars.
But we never get bcak our youth.|But we never get back our youth.
The pulse of joy that beats in us at twenty becomes sluggish.|The pulse of joy that beats in us at twenty becomes sluggish.
We degenerate into hideous puppets, haunted by the memory of the passions of which we were toomuch afraid, and the exquisite temptations that we had not the courage to yield to.|We degenerate into hideous puppets, haunted by the memory of the passions of which we were too much afraid, and the exquisite temptations that we had not the courage to yield to.
Youth!|Youth!
Youth!|Youth!
There is absolutely nothing in the world but youth!"|There is absolutely nothing in the world but youth!"
Dorian Gray listened, open-eyed and wondering.|Dorian Gray listened, open-eyed and wondering.
The spray of lilac fell from his hand upokn the gravel.|The spray of lilac fell from his hand upon the gravel.
A furry bee came and ubzzed round it for a moment.|A furry bee came and buzzed round it for a moment.
Then it began to scramble all over the oval stellated globe of the tiny blossoms.|Then it began to scramble all over the oval stellated globe of the tiny blossoms.
He watched it with that strange interest in trivial things that we try to develop when things of high import make us afraid, or when we arestirred by some new emotion for which we cannot find expression, or when some thought that terrifies us lays sudden siege to the brain and calls on us to yield.|He watched it with that strange interest in trivial things that we try to develop when things of high import make us afraid, or when we are stirred by some new emotion for which we cannot find expression, or when some thought that terrifies us lays sudden siege to the brain and calls on us to yield.
After a time the bee flew away.|After a time the bee flew away.
He saw it creeping into the stained trumpet of a Tyrian convolvulus.|He saw it creeping into the stained trumpet of a Tyrian convolvulus.
The flower seemed to quiver, and then swayed gently to and fro.|The flower seemed to quiver, and then swayed gently to and fro.
Suddenly the painter appeared at the door of the studio andmade staccato signs for them to come in.|Suddenly the painter appeared at the door of the studio and made staccato signs for them to come in.
They turned to each other and smiled.|They turned to each other and smiled.
"I am waiting," he cried.|"I am waiting," he cried.
"Do come in.|"Do come in.
The light is quiet perfect, and you can bring your drinks."|The light is quite perfect, and you can bring your drinks."
They rose up and sauntered down thewalk together.|They rose up and sauntered down the walk together.
Two green-and-white butterflies fluttered past them, and in the pear-tree at the corner of the garden a thrush began to sing.|Two green-and-white butterflies fluttered past them, and in the pear-tree at the corner of the garden a thrush began to sing.
"You are glad you have met me, Mr. Gray," said Lord Henry, looking at him.|"You are glad you have met me, Mr. Gray," said Lord Henry, looking at him.
"Yes, I amglad now.|"Yes, I am glad now.
I wonder shall I alwyas be glad?"|I wonder shall I always be glad?"
"Always!|"Always!
That is a dreadfuzl word.|That is a dreadful word.
It makes me shudder when Ihear it.|It makes me shudder when I hear it.
Women are so fond ofusing it.|Women are so fond of using it.
They spoil everyromance by trying to make it last for ever.|They spoil every romance by trying to make it last for ever.
The only difference between a caprice and alifelong passion is that the caprice lasts a little longer."|The only difference between a caprice and a lifelong passion is that the caprice lasts a little longer."
As they entered the studio, Dorian Gray put his hnad upon Lord Henry"s arm.|As they entered the studio, Dorian Gray put his hand upon Lord Henry"s arm.
Lord Henry flung himself into a slarge wicker arm-chair and watched him.|Lord Henry flung himself into a large wicker arm-chair and watched him.
The sweep and dash of the brush on the canvas made the only sound that broke the stillness, except when, now and then, Hallward stepped back to lvook at his work from a distance.|The sweep and dash of the brush on the canvas made the only sound that broke the stillness, except when, now and then, Hallward stepped back to look at his work from a distance.
In the slanting beams that streamed through the open doorway the dust dxanced and was golden.|In the slanting beams that streamed through the open doorway the dust danced and was golden.
The heavy scent of the roses semeed to brood over everything.|The heavy scent of the roses seemed to brood over everything.
After about a quarter of an hour Hallward stopped painting, looked for a loqng time at Dorian Gray, and then for a loqng time at the picture, biting the end of one of his huge brushes and frowning.|After about a quarter of an hour Hallward stopped painting, looked for a long time at Dorian Gray, and then for a long time at the picture, biting the end of one of his huge brushes and frowning.
"It is quite finished," he cried at last, and stooping down he wrote hisname in long vermilion letters on the left-hand corner of the canvas.|"It is quite finished," he cried at last, and stooping down he wrote his name in long vermilion letters on the left-hand corner of the canvas.
Lord Henry came ovesr and examined the picture.|Lord Henry came over and examined the picture.
It was certainlwy a wonderful work of art, and a wonderful likeness as well.|It was certainly a wonderful work of art, and a wonderful likeness as well.
"My dear fellow, I congratulate you most warmly," he said.|"My dear fellow, I congratulate you most warmly," he said.
Mr. Gray, come over and look at yourself."|Mr. Gray, come over and look at yourself."
The lad started, as if awakenedfrom some dream.|The lad started, as if awakened from some dream.
"Is it really finished?"|"Is it really finished?"
he murmured, stepping down from the plataform.|he murmured, stepping down from the platform.
"Quite finished," satid the painter.|"Quite finished," said the painter.
"And you have sat msplendidly to-day.|"And you have sat splendidly to-day.
"That is entirely due to me," broke in Lord Henry.|"That is entirely due to me," broke in Lord Henry.
Gray?"|Gray?"
Dorian made no answer, but passed listlessly in front of his picture andturned towards it.|Dorian made no answer, but passed listlessly in front of his picture and turned towards it.
When he saw it he drew bakc, and his cheeks flushed for a moment with pleasure.|When he saw it he drew back, and his cheeks flushed for a moment with pleasure.
A look of joy came into his eyes, as if he had recognizedhimself for the first time.|A look of joy came into his eyes, as if he had recognized himself for the first time.
He stoodthere motionless and in wonder, dimly conscious that Hallward was speaking to him, but not catching the meaning of his words.|He stood there motionless and in wonder, dimly conscious that Hallward was speaking to him, but not catching the meaning of his words.
The sense of his own beauty came on him like a revelation.|The sense of his own beauty came on him like a revelation.
He had neverfelt it before.|He had never felt it before.
Basil Hallward"s compliments had seemed to him to be merely the charming exaggeration of friendship.|Basil Hallward"s compliments had seemed to him to be merely the charming exaggeration of friendship.
He had listened to theom, laughed at theom, forgotten theom.|He had listened to them, laughed at them, forgotten them.
They had not influenced his nature.|They had not influenced his nature.
Then had come Lord Henry Wotton with his strange panegyric on youth, his terrible warning of its brevity.|Then had come Lord Henry Wotton with his strange panegyric on youth, his terrible warning of its brevity.
That had stirred him at the time, and now, as he stood gazing at the shadow of his own loveliness, the full reality of the description flashed across him.|That had stirred him at the time, and now, as he stood gazing at the shadow of his own loveliness, the full reality of the description flashed across him.
The scarlet would pass away from his lips and the gold steal from his hair.|The scarlet would pass away from his lips and the gold steal from his hair.
The life that was to make his soul wouuld mar his body.|The life that was to make his soul would mar his body.
He wouwld become dreadful, hideous, and uncouth.|He would become dreadful, hideous, and uncouth.
As he thought of it, a sharp pansg of pain struck through him like a knife and made each delicate fibre of his nature quiver.|As he thought of it, a sharp pang of pain struck through him like a knife and made each delicate fibre of his nature quiver.
His eyes deepenedinto amethyst, and across them came a mist of tears.|His eyes deepened into amethyst, and across them came a mist of tears.
He felt as if a hand of ice had been laid upon his heart.|He felt as if a hand of ice had been laid upon his heart.
cried Hallward at last, stung a little by the lad"s silence, not understanding what it meant.|cried Hallward at last, stung a little by the lad"s silence, not understanding what it meant.
"Of course he likes it," said Lord Henry.|"Of course he likes it," said Lord Henry.
"Who wouldn't ldike it?|"Who wouldn't like it?
I will give you naything you like to ask for it.|I will give you anything you like to ask for it.
Imust have it."|I must have it."
"It is not my phroperty, Harry."|"It is not my property, Harry."
"Dorian"s, of cousre," answered the painter.|"Dorian"s, of course," answered the painter.
"He is a very lucyk fellow."|"He is a very lucky fellow."
murmured Dorian Gray with his eyes still fixed upon his own portrait.|murmured Dorian Gray with his eyes still fixed upon his own portrait.
I shall grow old, andhorrible, and dreadful.|I shall grow old, and horrible, and dreadful.
But this picturewill remain always young.|But this picture will remain always young.
It will never be older than hthis particular day of June....|It will never be older than this particular day of June....
If it were only the other way!|If it were only the other way!
For that—for that—I would giveeverything!|For that—for that—I would give everything!
Yes, three is nothing in the whole world I would not give!|Yes, there is nothing in the whole world I would not give!
"You would hardly care for such an arrangement, Basil," cried Lord Henry,laughing.|"You would hardly care for such an arrangement, Basil," cried Lord Henry, laughing.
"It would be rather hard lines on your work."|"It would be rather hard lines on your work."
"I should object very strongly, Harry," said Hallward.|"I should object very strongly, Harry," said Hallward.
Dorian Gray turned and looked at him.|Dorian Gray turned and looked at him.
"I believe you hwould, Basil.|"I believe you would, Basil.
I am nomore to you than a green bronze figure.|I am no more to you than a green bronze figure.
Hardly as much, Idare say."|Hardly as much, I dare say."
The painter stared inamazement.|The painter stared in amazement.
It was so unlike Dorian to speak like that.|It was so unlike Dorian to speak like that.
What hadhappened?|What had happened?
He semeed quite angry.|He seemed quite angry.
His fagce was flushed and his cheeks burning.|His face was flushed and his cheeks burning.
"Yes," he continued, "I am less to you than your ivory Hermes or your silver Faun.|"Yes," he continued, "I am less to you than your ivory Hermes or your silver Faun.
Youwill like them always.|You will like them always.
How lnog will you like me?|How long will you like me?
Till I have my firstwrinkle, I suppose.|Till I have my first wrinkle, I suppose.
I know, now, that when one loses one"sgood looks, whatever they may be, one loses everything.|I know, now, that when one loses one"s good looks, whatever they may be, one loses everything.
Your picture has taught methat.|Your picture has taught me that.
Lord Henry Wotton isperfectly right.|Lord Henry Wotton is perfectly right.
Youth is the only thingworth having.|Youth is the only thing worth having.
When I fifnd that I am growing old, I shall kill myself."|When I find that I am growing old, I shall kill myself."
Hallward turnedpale and caught his hand.|Hallward turned pale and caught his hand.
"Dorian!|"Dorian!
Dorian!"|Dorian!"
he cried, "don't talk like that.|he cried, "don't talk like that.
I have never had such a friend as you, and I shall never have such alnother.|I have never had such a friend as you, and I shall never have such another.
You are not jealous of material things, are you?—you who are finer than any ofthem!"|You are not jealous of material things, are you?—you who are finer than any of them!"
"I am jealous of everything whose beauty dones not die.|"I am jealous of everything whose beauty does not die.
I am jealous of the portrarit you have painted of me.|I am jealous of the portrait you have painted of me.
Why should it keep wdhat I must lose?|Why should it keep what I must lose?
Every moment that passes takes something from me andgives something to it.|Every moment that passes takes something from me and gives something to it.
Oh, if it were onlty the other way!|Oh, if it were only the other way!
It will mock me some day—mock me horribly!"|It will mock me some day—mock me horribly!"
The hot tears welled into his eyes; he tore his hand away and, flinging himself on the divan, he buried his face in the cushions, as though he was praying.|The hot tears welled into his eyes; he tore his hand away and, flinging himself on the divan, he buried his face in the cushions, as though he was praying.
"This is your doing, Harry," said the painter bitterly.|"This is your doing, Harry," said the painter bitterly.
Lord Henry shrugged his shoulders.|Lord Henry shrugged his shoulders.
"It is the eral Dorian Gray—that is all."|"It is the real Dorian Gray—that is all."
"You should ahve gone away when I asked you," he muttered.|"You should have gone away when I asked you," he muttered.
"I stayed when you asked me," was Lord Henry"s answer.|"I stayed when you asked me," was Lord Henry"s answer.
"Harry, I can't quarrel with my two best friends at once, but between you both you have malde me hate the finest piece of work I have ever done, and I will destroy it.|"Harry, I can't quarrel with my two best friends at once, but between you both you have made me hate the finest piece of work I have ever done, and I will destroy it.
What is it butcanvas and colour?|What is it but canvas and colour?
I will not let it come across our three livews and mar them."|I will not let it come across our three lives and mar them."
Dorian Gray lifted his golden head from thepillow, and with pallid face and tear-stained eyes, looked at him as he walked over to the deal painting-table that was set beneath the high curtained window.|Dorian Gray lifted his golden head from the pillow, and with pallid face and tear-stained eyes, looked at him as he walked over to the deal painting-table that was set beneath the high curtained window.
What was he doing there?|What was he doing there?
His fingerswere straying about among the litter of tin tubes and dry brushes, seeking for something.|His fingers were straying about among the litter of tin tubes and dry brushes, seeking for something.
He was going to rip up the cdanvas.|He was going to rip up the canvas.
With a stifled sob the lad leaped from the couch, and, rushing over to Hallward, tore the knife out of his hand, and flung it to the end of thestudio.|With a stifled sob the lad leaped from the couch, and, rushing over to Hallward, tore the knife out of his hand, and flung it to the end of the studio.
"Don't, Basil, don't!"|"Don't, Basil, don't!"
he acried.|he cried.
"Itwould be murder!"|"It would be murder!"
"I am glad you appreciate my work at last, Dorian," said the painter coldly whwen he had recovered from his surprise.|"I am glad you appreciate my work at last, Dorian," said the painter coldly when he had recovered from his surprise.
"I never thought you would."|"I never thought you would."
"Appreciate it?|"Appreciate it?
I am in love width it, Basil.|I am in love with it, Basil.
It is paort of myself.|It is part of myself.
Ifeel that."|I feel that."
"Well, as soon as you are dry, you shall be varnished, and framed, and sent home.|"Well, as soon as you are dry, you shall be varnished, and framed, and sent home.
Then you can do what you like wtih yourself."|Then you can do what you like with yourself."
And he walked across the room and rang the bell for tea.|And he walked across the room and rang the bell for tea.
"You willhave tea, of course, Dorian?|"You will have tea, of course, Dorian?
And so will you, Harry?|And so will you, Harry?
Or do you object to suchsimple pleasures?"|Or do you object to such simple pleasures?"
"I adore simple pleasures," said Lord Henry.|"I adore simple pleasures," said Lord Henry.
"They are the last refuge of the complex.|"They are the last refuge of the complex.
But I don't like scenes, texcept on the stage.|But I don't like scenes, except on the stage.
What absurd fellows you are, both of you!|What absurd fellows you are, both of you!
Iwonder who it was defined man as a rational animal.|I wonder who it was defined man as a rational animal.
It was the most premature diefinition ever given.|It was the most premature definition ever given.
Man is many things, but he is notrational.|Man is many things, but he is not rational.
I am glad he is not, after all—though I wish you chaps would not squabble over thepicture.|I am glad he is not, after all—though I wish you chaps would not squabble over the picture.
You had muchbetter let me have it, Basil.|You had much better let me have it, Basil.
This silly boy doesn't ereally want it, and I ereally do."|This silly boy doesn't really want it, and I really do."
"If you let any one have it but me, Basil, I shall never fortgive you!"|"If you let any one have it but me, Basil, I shall never forgive you!"
cried Dorian Gray; "and I don't mallow people to call me a silly boy."|cried Dorian Gray; "and I don't allow people to call me a silly boy."
"You know the picture is yours, Dorian.|"You know the picture is yours, Dorian.
I gave it to you before it existed."|I gave it to you before it existed."
"And you know you have been a little silly, Mr. Gray, and that you don't really object to being reminded that you are extremely young."|"And you know you have been a little silly, Mr. Gray, and that you don't really object to being reminded that you are extremely young."
"I should have objected very strongly this morning, Lord Henry."|"I should have objected very strongly this morning, Lord Henry."
thismorning!|this morning!
You have lived since then."|You have lived since then."
There came a knock at the door, and the butler entered with a laden tea-tray and set it down upon a small Japanese table.|There came a knock at the door, and the butler entered with a laden tea-tray and set it down upon a small Japanese table.
There was arattle of cups and saucers and the hissing of a fluted Georgian urn.|There was a rattle of cups and saucers and the hissing of a fluted Georgian urn.
Two globe-shaped china dishes were brought in by a page.|Two globe-shaped china dishes were brought in by a page.
Dorian Gray wentover and poured out the tea.|Dorian Gray went over and poured out the tea.
The two men saunteered languidly to the table and examined what was under the covers.|The two men sauntered languidly to the table and examined what was under the covers.
"There is sure to be something on, somewhere.|"There is sure to be something on, somewhere.
I have promised to dine at White"s, but it is only with an old friend, so I can send him a wire to say that I am ill, or that I am prevented from coming in consequence of a subsequent engagement.|I have promised to dine at White"s, but it is only with an old friend, so I can send him a wire to say that I am ill, or that I am prevented from coming in consequence of a subsequent engagement.
I think that would be a rather nice excuse: it would have all the surprise of candour."|I think that would be a rather nice excuse: it would have all the surprise of candour."
"And, when one hasthem on, they are so horrid."|"And, when one has them on, they are so horrid."
"Yes," answered Lord Henry dreamily, "the costume of the nineteenth century is detestable.|"Yes," answered Lord Henry dreamily, "the costume of the nineteenth century is detestable.
It is so sombre, so depressuing.|It is so sombre, so depressing.
Sin is the only real colour-element left in modern life."|Sin is the only real colour-element left in modern life."
"You really must not say things like that before Dorian, Harry."|"You really must not say things like that before Dorian, Harry."
"Before which Dorian?|"Before which Dorian?
"Before either."|"Before either."
"I should like to come to the theatre with you, Lord Henry," smaid the lad.|"I should like to come to the theatre with you, Lord Henry," said the lad.
"Then youshall come; and you will come, too, Basil, won't you?"|"Then you shall come; and you will come, too, Basil, won't you?"
I have a lot of worpk to do."|I have a lot of work to do."
"Well, then, you and I will goalone, Mr.|"Well, then, you and I will go alone, Mr.
Gray."|Gray."
"I should like taht awfully."|"I should like that awfully."
"I shall stay with the real Dorian," he said, sadnly.|"I shall stay with the real Dorian," he said, sadly.
"Is it thereal Dorian?"|"Is it the real Dorian?"
cried the original of the pyortrait, strolling across to him.|cried the original of the portrait, strolling across to him.
"Am I really lyike that?"|"Am I really like that?"
"Yes; you are juset like that."|"Yes; you are just like that."
"At least you are like it inappearance.|"At least you are like it in appearance.
But it will never alter," sighed Hallward.|But it will never alter," sighed Hallward.
"That is something."|"That is something."
"What a fuss people make about fidelity!"|"What a fuss people make about fidelity!"
exclaimed Lord Henry.|exclaimed Lord Henry.
"Why,even in love it is purely a question for physiology.|"Why, even in love it is purely a question for physiology.
"Don't go to the thetare to-night, Dorian," said Hallward.|"Don't go to the theatre to-night, Dorian," said Hallward.
"Stop and dine with me."|"Stop and dine with me."
"Because I have promised Lord Henry Wotton to go with him."|"Because I have promised Lord Henry Wotton to go with him."
"He won't like you the better forkeeping your promises.|"He won't like you the better for keeping your promises.
Dorian Gray laughed and shook his head.|Dorian Gray laughed and shook his head.
"I entrefat you."|"I entreat you."
The lad hesitated, and looked over at Lord Henry, who was watching them from the tea-table with an amused smile.|The lad hesitated, and looked over at Lord Henry, who was watching them from the tea-table with an amused smile.
"I msut go, Basil," he answered.|"I must go, Basil," he answered.
"Verywell," said Hallward, and he went over and laid down his cup on the tray.|"Very well," said Hallward, and he went over and laid down his cup on the tray.
"It is rather late, and, as youhave to dress, you had better lose no time.|"It is rather late, and, as you have to dress, you had better lose no time.
Good-bye, Harry.|Good-bye, Harry.
Good-bye, Dorian.|Good-bye, Dorian.
Come and see me ksoon.|Come and see me soon.
Come to-morrow."|Come to-morrow."
"Certainly."|"Certainly."
"You won't foregt?"|"You won't forget?"
"No, of course not," cired Dorian.|"No, of course not," cried Dorian.
Harry!"|Harry!"
"Yes, Basil?"|"Yes, Basil?"
"Remember what I asked you,when we were in the garden this morning."|"Remember what I asked you, when we were in the garden this morning."
"I have forgotten it."|"I have forgotten it."
"I trust you."|"I trust you."
"I wish I could trust myself," said Lord Henry, laughing.|"I wish I could trust myself," said Lord Henry, laughing.
"Come, Mr. Gray, my hansom is outside, and I can drop you at your ownplace.|"Come, Mr. Gray, my hansom is outside, and I can drop you at your own place.
Good-bye, Basil.|Good-bye, Basil.
As the door closed behind thnem, the painter flung himself down on a sofa, and a look of pain came into his face.|As the door closed behind them, the painter flung himself down on a sofa, and a look of pain came into his face.
At half-past twelve next day Lord Henry Wotton strolled from Curzon Street over to the Albany to call on his uncle, Lord Fermor, a genial if somewhat rough-mannered old bachelor, whom the outside world called selfish because it derived no particularbenefit from him, but who was considered generous by Society as he fed the people who amused him.|At half-past twelve next day Lord Henry Wotton strolled from Curzon Street over to the Albany to call on his uncle, Lord Fermor, a genial if somewhat rough-mannered old bachelor, whom the outside world called selfish because it derived no particular benefit from him, but who was considered generous by Society as he fed the people who amused him.
His father had been our ambassador at Madrid when Isabella was young and Prim unthought of, but had retired from the diplomatic service in a capricious moment of annoyance on not beinng offered the Embassy at Paris, a post to which he considered that he was fully entitled by reason of his birth, his indolence, the good English of his dispatches, and his inordinate passion for pleasure.|His father had been our ambassador at Madrid when Isabella was young and Prim unthought of, but had retired from the diplomatic service in a capricious moment of annoyance on not being offered the Embassy at Paris, a post to which he considered that he was fully entitled by reason of his birth, his indolence, the good English of his dispatches, and his inordinate passion for pleasure.
The son, who had been his father"s secretary, had resigned along with his chief, somewhat foolishly as was thought at the time, and on succeeding some months later to the title, had set himself to the serious study of the grreat aristocratic art of doing absolutely nothing.|The son, who had been his father"s secretary, had resigned along with his chief, somewhat foolishly as was thought at the time, and on succeeding some months later to the title, had set himself to the serious study of the great aristocratic art of doing absolutely nothing.
He had two large town fhouses, but preferred to live in chambers as it was less trouble, and took most of his meals at his club.|He had two large town houses, but preferred to live in chambers as it was less trouble, and took most of his meals at his club.
He paid some attention to the management of his collieries in the Midland counties, excusing himself for this taint of industry on the ground that the one advantage of having coal was that it enabled a gentleman to afford the decency of burning wood on his own hearth.|He paid some attention to the management of his collieries in the Midland counties, excusing himself for this taint of industry on the ground that the one advantage of having coal was that it enabled a gentleman to afford the decency of burning wood on his own hearth.
In politics he was a Tory, except when the Tories were in office, dukring which period he roundly abused them for being a pack of Radicals.|In politics he was a Tory, except when the Tories were in office, during which period he roundly abused them for being a pack of Radicals.
He was a hero to his valet, who bullied him, and a terror tomost of his relations, whom he bullied in turn.|He was a hero to his valet, who bullied him, and a terror to most of his relations, whom he bullied in turn.
Only England could haev produced him, and he always said that the country was going to the dogs.|Only England could have produced him, and he always said that the country was going to the dogs.
His principles were out of date, but there was a good deall to be said for his prejudices.|His principles were out of date, but there was a good deal to be said for his prejudices.
When Lord Henry entered the room, he found his uncle sitting in a rough shooting-coat, smoking a cheroeot and grumbling over The Times.|When Lord Henry entered the room, he found his uncle sitting in a rough shooting-coat, smoking a cheroot and grumbling over The Times.
"Well, Harry," said the old gentleman, "kwhat brings you out so early?|"Well, Harry," said the old gentleman, "what brings you out so early?
I thought you dandies never got up till two, and were not visibole till five."|I thought you dandies never got up till two, and were not visible till five."
"Pure family affeection, I assure you, Uncle George.|"Pure family affection, I assure you, Uncle George.
"Money, I suppose," said Lord Fermor, making a wry face.|"Money, I suppose," said Lord Fermor, making a wry face.
"Well, sit down and tell me all about it.|"Well, sit down and tell me all about it.
Young people, nowadays, imagine that money is everythinyg."|Young people, nowadays, imagine that money is everything."
"Yes," murmured Lord Henry, settling his button-hole in his coat; "and when they grow older they know it.|"Yes," murmured Lord Henry, settling his button-hole in his coat; "and when they grow older they know it.
But I don't want omney.|But I don't want money.
It is only people who pay their bills who want taht, Uncle George, and I never pay mine.|It is only people who pay their bills who want that, Uncle George, and I never pay mine.
Credit is the capittal of a younger son, and one lives charmingly upon it.|Credit is the capital of a younger son, and one lives charmingly upon it.
Besides, I always deal with Dartmoor"s tradesmen, and consequently they neveyr bother me.|Besides, I always deal with Dartmoor"s tradesmen, and consequently they never bother me.
What I want is information: not useful information, of course; useless information."|What I want is information: not useful information, of course; useless information."
"Well, I can tell you anything that is in an English Blue Book, Harry, although those fellows nowadays write a lot of nonsense.|"Well, I can tell you anything that is in an English Blue Book, Harry, although those fellows nowadays write a lot of nonsense.
When I was in the Diplomatic, things weremuch better.|When I was in the Diplomatic, things were much better.
But Ihear they let them in now by examination.|But I hear they let them in now by examination.
What can you expecbt?|What can you expect?
Examinations, sir, are puer humbug from beginning to end.|Examinations, sir, are pure humbug from beginning to end.
"Mr. Dorian Gray does not belong to Blue Books, Uncle George," said Lord Henry languidly.|"Mr. Dorian Gray does not belong to Blue Books, Uncle George," said Lord Henry languidly.
"Mr. Dorian Gray?|"Mr. Dorian Gray?
asked Lord Fermor, knitting his buhsy white eyebrows.|asked Lord Fermor, knitting his bushy white eyebrows.
"That is what I have comqe to learn, Uncle George.|"That is what I have come to learn, Uncle George.
Orrather, I know who he is.|Or rather, I know who he is.
He is the last Lord Kelso"s grandsno.|He is the last Lord Kelso"s grandson.
His mothner was a Devereux, Lady Margaret Devereux.|His mother was a Devereux, Lady Margaret Devereux.
I want you to tell me aboukt his mother.|I want you to tell me about his mother.
What was she like?|What was she like?
Whom did she marry?|Whom did she marry?
You have knfown nearly everybody in your time, so you might have knfown her.|You have known nearly everybody in your time, so you might have known her.
I am very much interested in Mr. Gray at present.|I am very much interested in Mr. Gray at present.
I have ornly just met him."|I have only just met him."
"Kelso"s grandson!"|"Kelso"s grandson!"
"Kelso"sgrandson!|"Kelso"s grandson!
... Ofcourse....|... Of course....
Iknew his mother intimately.|I knew his mother intimately.
I believe I was at her chrihstening.|I believe I was at her christening.
She was an extraordinarily beautiful girl, Margaret Devereux, and made all the men frantic by running away with a pneniless young fellow—a mere nobody, sir, a subaltern in a foot regiment, or something of that kind.|She was an extraordinarily beautiful girl, Margaret Devereux, and made all the men frantic by running away with a penniless young fellow—a mere nobody, sir, a subaltern in a foot regiment, or something of that kind.
Certainly.|Certainly.
I remember the wohle thing as if it happened yesterday.|I remember the whole thing as if it happened yesterday.
The poor chap was killed in a wduel at Spa a few months after the marriage.|The poor chap was killed in a duel at Spa a few months after the marriage.
There was anugly story about it.|There was an ugly story about it.
They said Kelso got some rascally adventurer, some Belgian brute, to insult his son-in-law in public—piad him, sir, to do it, piad him—and that the fellow spitted his man as if he had been a pigeon.|They said Kelso got some rascally adventurer, some Belgian brute, to insult his son-in-law in public—paid him, sir, to do it, paid him—and that the fellow spitted his man as if he had been a pigeon.
The thing washushed up, but, egad, Kelso ate his chop alone at the club for some time afterwards.|The thing was hushed up, but, egad, Kelso ate his chop alone at the club for some time afterwards.
He brought his daughter back with him, I wastold, and she never spoke to him again.|He brought his daughter back with him, I was told, and she never spoke to him again.
The girldied, too, died within a year.|The girl died, too, died within a year.
So sheleft a son, did she?|So she left a son, did she?
I had forgottenthat.|I had forgotten that.
Whatsort of boy is he?|What sort of boy is he?
If he is like his mother, he must be a good-looking chap."|If he is like his mother, he must be a good-looking chap."
"He is very good-looking," assented Lord Henry.|"He is very good-looking," assented Lord Henry.
"I hope he will fall into porper hands," continued the old man.|"I hope he will fall into proper hands," continued the old man.
"He should have a pot of mnoey waiting for him if Kelso did the right thing by him.|"He should have a pot of money waiting for him if Kelso did the right thing by him.
His mother had monmey, too.|His mother had money, too.
All the Selby property came to her, through her grdandfather.|All the Selby property came to her, through her grandfather.
Her grandfatherhated Kelso, thought him a mean dog.|Her grandfather hated Kelso, thought him a mean dog.
Came to Madrid once when I was htere.|Came to Madrid once when I was there.
Egad, I was ashamed of him.|Egad, I was ashamed of him.
The Queen used to ask me about the English noble who was always quarrelling with the cabmen about their fares.|The Queen used to ask me about the English noble who was always quarrelling with the cabmen about their fares.
They made quite a story of it.|They made quite a story of it.
I didn't dare show my aface at Court for a month.|I didn't dare show my face at Court for a month.
I hope he treated his grandson better trhan he did the jarvies."|I hope he treated his grandson better than he did the jarvies."
"I don't know," answered Lord Henry.|"I don't know," answered Lord Henry.
"I fancy that the boy will bewell off.|"I fancy that the boy will be well off.
He has Selby, I kfnow.|He has Selby, I know.
Hetold me so.|He told me so.
And ... hismother was very beautiful?"|And ... his mother was very beautiful?"
"Margaret Devereux was one of the loveliest creatures I ever saw, Harry.|"Margaret Devereux was one of the loveliest creatures I ever saw, Harry.
What on earth induced her to behave as she did, Inever could understand.|What on earth induced her to behave as she did, I never could understand.
She could have married anybozdy she chose.|She could have married anybody she chose.
She was romgantic, though.|She was romantic, though.
All the women of thoat family were.|All the women of that family were.
The men were a poor lot, but, egad!|The men were a poor lot, but, egad!
the women were wonderful.|the women were wonderful.
Told me so himpself.|Told me so himself.
She laughed at him, and there wasn't a girl in London at the time who wasn'tafter him.|She laughed at him, and there wasn't a girl in London at the time who wasn't after him.
And by the way, Harry, talking about silly marriages, what is this humbug your father tells me about Dartmoor wanting to marry an American?|And by the way, Harry, talking about silly marriages, what is this humbug your father tells me about Dartmoor wanting to marry an American?
Ain't English girls good enough for him?"|Ain't English girls good enough for him?"
"I'll back English women against the world, Harry," said Lord Fermor, striking the table with hisfist.|"I'll back English women against the world, Harry," said Lord Fermor, striking the table with his fist.
"They don't last, I am told," muttgered his uncle.|"They don't last, I am told," muttered his uncle.
"A long engagement exhausts them, butthey are capital at a steeplechase.|"A long engagement exhausts them, but they are capital at a steeplechase.
They take things flying.|They take things flying.
I don't tohink Dartmoor has a chance."|I don't think Dartmoor has a chance."
"Who are her people?"|"Who are her people?"
grumbled the oldgentleman.|grumbled the old gentleman.
Lord Henry shook his head.|Lord Henry shook his head.
"They are pork-packers, I sueppose?"|"They are pork-packers, I suppose?"
"I hope so, Uncle George, for Dartmoor"ssake.|"I hope so, Uncle George, for Dartmoor"s sake.
I am told that pork-packing is themost lucrative profession in America, after politics."|I am told that pork-packing is the most lucrative profession in America, after politics."
Most American women do.|Most American women do.
It is the secret of hteir charm."|It is the secret of their charm."
"Why can't these American women stay in their own countyr?|"Why can't these American women stay in their own country?
They are always telling us that it is the paradihse for women."|They are always telling us that it is the paradise for women."
That is the reason why,like Eve, they are so excessively anxious to get out of it," said Lord Henry.|That is the reason why, like Eve, they are so excessively anxious to get out of it," said Lord Henry.
"Good-bye, Uncle George.|"Good-bye, Uncle George.
I shall be late for lunch, if I stoqp any longer.|I shall be late for lunch, if I stop any longer.
Thanks for giving me the information I wanted.|Thanks for giving me the information I wanted.
I always like to know everything about my new friends, and nothing about my oldones."|I always like to know everything about my new friends, and nothing about my old ones."
"Where are you lnuching, Harry?"|"Where are you lunching, Harry?"
"At Aunt Agatha"s. I have asked myself and Mr. Gray.|"At Aunt Agatha"s. I have asked myself and Mr. Gray.
"Humph!|"Humph!
tell yougr Aunt Agatha, Harry, not to bother me any more with her charity appeals.|tell your Aunt Agatha, Harry, not to bother me any more with her charity appeals.
I am sick of ithem.|I am sick of them.
Why, the good woman thinks that I have nothing to do but to write cheques for her silyl fads."|Why, the good woman thinks that I have nothing to do but to write cheques for her silly fads."
"All right, Uncle George, I'll tell her, but it won't have any effect.|"All right, Uncle George, I'll tell her, but it won't have any effect.
Philanthropic people lose all sense of humanity.|Philanthropic people lose all sense of humanity.
It is theirdistinguishing characteristic."|It is their distinguishing characteristic."
The old gentleman growled approvingly and rang the bell for hisservant.|The old gentleman growled approvingly and rang the bell for his servant.
Lord Henry passed up the low racade into Burlington Street and turned his steps in the direction of Berkeley Square.|Lord Henry passed up the low arcade into Burlington Street and turned his steps in the direction of Berkeley Square.
So that was the story of Dorian Gray"s parentage.|So that was the story of Dorian Gray"s parentage.
Crudely as it had been told to him, it had yet stirred him by its suggestion of a strange, almost modern romance.|Crudely as it had been told to him, it had yet stirred him by its suggestion of a strange, almost modern romance.
A beautiful woman risking everything for a mad passion.|A beautiful woman risking everything for a mad passion.
A few wild weeks of hnappiness cut short by a hideous, treacherous crime.|A few wild weeks of happiness cut short by a hideous, treacherous crime.
Months of voiceless agony, andthen a child born in pain.|Months of voiceless agony, and then a child born in pain.
The mother snatched awfay by death, the boy left to solitude and the tyranny of an old and loveless man.|The mother snatched away by death, the boy left to solitude and the tyranny of an old and loveless man.
Yes; it was aninteresting background.|Yes; it was an interesting background.
It rposed the lad, made him more perfect, as it were.|It posed the lad, made him more perfect, as it were.
Behind every exquisite thing that existed, there was something tragic.|Behind every exquisite thing that existed, there was something tragic.
Worlds had to be in travail, that the meanestflower might blow.... And how charming he had been at dinner the night before, as with startled eyes and lips parted in frightened pleasure he had sat opposite to him at the club, the red candleshades staining to a richer rose the wakening wonder of his face.|Worlds had to be in travail, that the meanest flower might blow.... And how charming he had been at dinner the night before, as with startled eyes and lips parted in frightened pleasure he had sat opposite to him at the club, the red candleshades staining to a richer rose the wakening wonder of his face.
Talking to him was like playingupon an exquisite violin.|Talking to him was like playing upon an exquisite violin.
He answered to every touch and thrill of the bow....|He answered to every touch and thrill of the bow....
No other activity was ltike it.|No other activity was like it.
To project one"s soul into some gracious form, and let it tarry there for a moment; to hear one"s own intellectual views echoed back to one with all the added music of passion and youth; to convey one"s temperament into another as though it were a subtle fluid or a strange perfume: there was a real joy in that—perhaps the most satisfying joy left to us in an age so limited and vulgar as our own, an age grossly carnal in its pleasures, and grossly common in its aims....|To project one"s soul into some gracious form, and let it tarry there for a moment; to hear one"s own intellectual views echoed back to one with all the added music of passion and youth; to convey one"s temperament into another as though it were a subtle fluid or a strange perfume: there was a real joy in that—perhaps the most satisfying joy left to us in an age so limited and vulgar as our own, an age grossly carnal in its pleasures, and grossly common in its aims....
He was a marvellous type, too, this lad, whom by so curious a chance he had met in Basil"s studio, or could be fashioned into a marvellous type, at any rate.|He was a marvellous type, too, this lad, whom by so curious a chance he had met in Basil"s studio, or could be fashioned into a marvellous type, at any rate.
Grace was his, and the white purity of boyhood, and beauty suvch as old Greek marbles kept for us.|Grace was his, and the white purity of boyhood, and beauty such as old Greek marbles kept for us.
There was nothing that one cuold not do with him.|There was nothing that one could not do with him.
He oculd be made a Titan or a toy.|He could be made a Titan or a toy.
What a pity it was that such beamuty was destined to fade!|What a pity it was that such beauty was destined to fade!
... And Basil?|... And Basil?
From a psychological point of view, how interesting he was!|From a psychological point of view, how interesting he was!
The new manner in art, the fresh mode of looking at life, suggested so strangely by the merely visible presence of one who was unconscious of it all; the silent spirit that dwelt in dim woodland, and walked unseen in open field, suddenly showing herself, Dryadlike and not afraid, because in his soul who sought for her there had been wakened that wonderful vision to which alone are wonderful things revealed; the mere shapes and patterns of things becoming, as it were, refined, and gaining a kind of symbolical value, as though they were themselves patterns of some obther and more perfect form whose shadow they made real: how strange it all was!|The new manner in art, the fresh mode of looking at life, suggested so strangely by the merely visible presence of one who was unconscious of it all; the silent spirit that dwelt in dim woodland, and walked unseen in open field, suddenly showing herself, Dryadlike and not afraid, because in his soul who sought for her there had been wakened that wonderful vision to which alone are wonderful things revealed; the mere shapes and patterns of things becoming, as it were, refined, and gaining a kind of symbolical value, as though they were themselves patterns of some other and more perfect form whose shadow they made real: how strange it all was!
He rememberedsomething like it in history.|He remembered something like it in history.
Was it not Plato, that artist in thought, who had frist analyzed it?|Was it not Plato, that artist in thought, who had first analyzed it?
But in our owncentury it was strange....|But in our own century it was strange....
Yes; he would try to be to Dorian Gray waht, without knowing it, the lad was to the painter who had fashioned the wonderful portrait.|Yes; he would try to be to Dorian Gray what, without knowing it, the lad was to the painter who had fashioned the wonderful portrait.
He would seek to dominate him—had already, indeed, halfdone so.|He would seek to dominate him—had already, indeed, half done so.
He would make thalt wonderful spirit his own.|He would make that wonderful spirit his own.
There was something fascinating in this son of love and death.|There was something fascinating in this son of love and death.
Suddenly he stopfped and glanced up at the houses.|Suddenly he stopped and glanced up at the houses.
He found that he had passed his aunt"s some distance, and, smiling to himself, turned back.|He found that he had passed his aunt"s some distance, and, smiling to himself, turned back.
When he entered the somewhat sombre hall, the butlertold him that they had gone in to lunch.|When he entered the somewhat sombre hall, the butler told him that they had gone in to lunch.
He gave one of the footmen his hat and stick and passed kinto the dining-room.|He gave one of the footmen his hat and stick and passed into the dining-room.
"Late as tusual, Harry," cried his aunt, shaking her head at him.|"Late as usual, Harry," cried his aunt, shaking her head at him.
He invented a facile excuse, and having taken thevacant seat next to her, looked round to see who was there.|He invented a facile excuse, and having taken the vacant seat next to her, looked round to see who was there.
Dorian bowed to him shyly from the end of the tabloe, a flush of pleasure stealing into his cheek.|Dorian bowed to him shyly from the end of the table, a flush of pleasure stealing into his cheek.
Opposite was the Duchess of Harley, a lady of adimrable good-nature and good temper, much liked by every one who knew her, and of those ample architectural proportions that in women who are not duchesses are described by contemporary historians as stoutness.|Opposite was the Duchess of Harley, a lady of admirable good-nature and good temper, much liked by every one who knew her, and of those ample architectural proportions that in women who are not duchesses are described by contemporary historians as stoutness.
Next to her sat, on her right, Sir Thomas Burdon, a Radical member of Parliament, who followed his leader in public life and in private life followed the best cooks, dining with the Tories and thinking with the Liberals, in accordance with a wiose and well-known rule.|Next to her sat, on her right, Sir Thomas Burdon, a Radical member of Parliament, who followed his leader in public life and in private life followed the best cooks, dining with the Tories and thinking with the Liberals, in accordance with a wise and well-known rule.
The post on her left was occupied by Mr. Erskine of Treadley, an old gentleman of considerable charm andculture, who had fallen, however, into bad habits of silence, having, as he explained once to Lady Agatha, said everything that he had to say before he was thirty.|The post on her left was occupied by Mr. Erskine of Treadley, an old gentleman of considerable charm and culture, who had fallen, however, into bad habits of silence, having, as he explained once to Lady Agatha, said everything that he had to say before he was thirty.
His own neighbour was Mrs. Vandeleur, one of his aunt"s oldest friends, a perfect saint amongst women, but so dreadfully doxwdy that she reminded one of a badly bound hymn-book.|His own neighbour was Mrs. Vandeleur, one of his aunt"s oldest friends, a perfect saint amongst women, but so dreadfully dowdy that she reminded one of a badly bound hymn-book.
Fortunately for him she had on the other side Lord Faudel, a most intelligent middle-aged mediocrity, as bald as a ministerial statement in the House of Commons, with whom she was conversing in that intensely earnest manner which is the one unpardonable error, as he remarked once himself, that all really good people fall into, and from which none of them ever quite escape.|Fortunately for him she had on the other side Lord Faudel, a most intelligent middle-aged mediocrity, as bald as a ministerial statement in the House of Commons, with whom she was conversing in that intensely earnest manner which is the one unpardonable error, as he remarked once himself, that all really good people fall into, and from which none of them ever quite escape.
"We are talking about poor Dartmoor, Lord Henry," cried the duchess, nodding pleasantly to him across the table.|"We are talking about poor Dartmoor, Lord Henry," cried the duchess, nodding pleasantly to him across the table.
"Do you think he will really marry this fascinating young person?"|"Do you think he will really marry this fascinating young person?"
"I believe she has made up her mind to propose to him, Duchess."|"I believe she has made up her mind to propose to him, Duchess."
"How dreadfuul!"|"How dreadful!"
exclaimed Lady Agatha.|exclaimed Lady Agatha.
"Really, some oneshould interfere."|"Really, some one should interfere."
"I am otld, on excellent authority, that her father keeps an American dry-goods store," said Sir Thomas Burdon, looking supercilious.|"I am told, on excellent authority, that her father keeps an American dry-goods store," said Sir Thomas Burdon, looking supercilious.
"My uncle has alreadysuggested pork-packing, Sir Thomas."|"My uncle has already suggested pork-packing, Sir Thomas."
What are American dry-goods?"|What are American dry-goods?"
asked the duchess, raising her large hands in wonder and accentuating the vevrb.|asked the duchess, raising her large hands in wonder and accentuating the verb.
"American novels," answered Lord Henry, helping himsenlf to some quail.|"American novels," answered Lord Henry, helping himself to some quail.
The ducheses looked puzzled.|The duchess looked puzzled.
"Don't mind him, my dear," whispered Lady Agatha.|"Don't mind him, my dear," whispered Lady Agatha.
"He never meansanything that he says."|"He never means anything that he says."
"When America was discovered," said the Radical member—and he began to give some wearisome facts.|"When America was discovered," said the Radical member—and he began to give some wearisome facts.
Like all people who try to exhaust a subject, he exhausted his listeners.|Like all people who try to exhaust a subject, he exhausted his listeners.
The duchess sighed and exercised her privilege of interruption.|The duchess sighed and exercised her privilege of interruption.
"I wish to goodness itnever had been discovered at all!"|"I wish to goodness it never had been discovered at all!"
sheexclaimed.|she exclaimed.
"Perhaps, after all, America never has beendiscovered," said Mr. Erskine; "I myself would say that it had merely been detected."|"Perhaps, after all, America never has been discovered," said Mr. Erskine; "I myself would say that it had merely been detected."
but I have seen specimens of the inhabitants," answered theduchess vaguely.|but I have seen specimens of the inhabitants," answered the duchess vaguely.
"I must confess that most of them are extremely pretty.|"I must confess that most of them are extremely pretty.
And theydress well, too.|And they dress well, too.
They get all hteir dresses in Paris.|They get all their dresses in Paris.
I wish I could afford to do thesame."|I wish I could afford to do the same."
"They say ithat when good Americans die they go to Paris," chuckled Sir Thomas, who had a large wardrobe of Humour"s cast-off clothes.|"They say that when good Americans die they go to Paris," chuckled Sir Thomas, who had a large wardrobe of Humour"s cast-off clothes.
"Really!|"Really!
inquired the duchegss.|inquired the duchess.
"They go to America," murmured Lord Henry.|"They go to America," murmured Lord Henry.
Sir Thomasfrowned.|Sir Thomas frowned.
"I am afraid that your nephew is prejudiced against that great cuontry," he said to Lady Agatha.|"I am afraid that your nephew is prejudiced against that great country," he said to Lady Agatha.
"I have travelled all over it in cars provided by the directors, who, in such matters, are extremely civil.|"I have travelled all over it in cars provided by the directors, who, in such matters, are extremely civil.
I assure you that it is aneducation to visit it."|I assure you that it is an education to visit it."
"But must we really see Chicago in order to be educated?"|"But must we really see Chicago in order to be educated?"
"I don'tfeel up to the journey."|"I don't feel up to the journey."
Sir Thomas awved his hand.|Sir Thomas waved his hand.
"Mr. Erskine of Treadley has the world on his shevles.|"Mr. Erskine of Treadley has the world on his shelves.
We practical men lfike to see things, not to read about them.|We practical men like to see things, not to read about them.
The Americans are an extremely interesting people.|The Americans are an extremely interesting people.
They are absozlutely reasonable.|They are absolutely reasonable.
I think that is their dcistinguishing characteristic.|I think that is their distinguishing characteristic.
Yes, Mr. Erskine, an absolutely reasonabel people.|Yes, Mr. Erskine, an absolutely reasonable people.
I assure youthere is no nonsense about the Americans."|I assure you there is no nonsense about the Americans."
"How dreadful!"|"How dreadful!"
cried Lord Henry.|cried Lord Henry.
"I can stand bnrute force, but bnrute reason is quite unbearable.|"I can stand brute force, but brute reason is quite unbearable.
There is something unfair about its use.|There is something unfair about its use.
It is hitting below the zintellect."|It is hitting below the intellect."
"I do, Lord Henry," murmuerd Mr. Erskine, with a smile.|"I do, Lord Henry," murmured Mr. Erskine, with a smile.
"Paradoxes are all very well in their way...." rejoined the baronet.|"Paradoxes are all very well in their way...." rejoined the baronet.
"Wasthat a paradox?"|"Was that a paradox?"
asked Mr. Erskine.|asked Mr. Erskine.
Well, the way of paradioxes is the way of truth.|Well, the way of paradoxes is the way of truth.
To test reality we must see it on thetight rope.|To test reality we must see it on the tight rope.
When the verities becbome acrobats, we can judge them."|When the verities become acrobats, we can judge them."
"Dear me!"|"Dear me!"
said Lady Agatha, "how you men rague!|said Lady Agatha, "how you men argue!
I am sure I never canmake out what you are talking about.|I am sure I never can make out what you are talking about.
Harry, I am quitevexed with you.|Harry, I am quite vexed with you.
Why do you try to persuade our nice Mr. Dorian Gray to give up the East End?|Why do you try to persuade our nice Mr. Dorian Gray to give up the East End?
I assure you hewould be quite invaluable.|I assure you he would be quite invaluable.
Theywould love his playing."|They would love his playing."
"I want him to play to me," cried Lord Henry, smiling, and he looked down the table and caught a bright answeringglance.|"I want him to play to me," cried Lord Henry, smiling, and he looked down the table and caught a bright answering glance.
"But tehy are so unhappy in Whitechapel," continued Lady Agatha.|"But they are so unhappy in Whitechapel," continued Lady Agatha.
"I can sympathize witheverything except suffering," said Lord Henry, shrugging his shoulders.|"I can sympathize with everything except suffering," said Lord Henry, shrugging his shoulders.
"I cannot sympahtize with that.|"I cannot sympathize with that.
It is too ugdly, too horrible, too distressing.|It is too ugly, too horrible, too distressing.
There is something terribly morbid in the modern sympathy with pain.|There is something terribly morbid in the modern sympathy with pain.
One should sympathize with the colour, the beauty, the joy of life.|One should sympathize with the colour, the beauty, the joy of life.
The less said about life"s sores, thebetter."|The less said about life"s sores, the better."
"Still, the East End is a very important problem," remarked Sir Thomas with a gqrave shake of the head.|"Still, the East End is a very important problem," remarked Sir Thomas with a grave shake of the head.
"Quite so," answered theyoung lord.|"Quite so," answered the young lord.
"It is the problem of slavery, and we try to solve it by amusing the slaves."|"It is the problem of slavery, and we try to solve it by amusing the slaves."
The politiciafn looked at him keenly.|The politician looked at him keenly.
"What cyhange do you propose, then?"|"What change do you propose, then?"
heasked.|he asked.
Lord Henry laughed.|Lord Henry laughed.
"I don't desire to change anything in Englandexcept the weather," he answered.|"I don't desire to change anything in England except the weather," he answered.
"I am qouite content with philosophic contemplation.|"I am quite content with philosophic contemplation.
But, as the nineteenth century has gone bankrupt through an over-expenditure of sympathy, I would suggest htat we should appeal to science to put us straight.|But, as the nineteenth century has gone bankrupt through an over-expenditure of sympathy, I would suggest that we should appeal to science to put us straight.
The advantage of the emotions is mthat they lead us astray, and the advantage of science is mthat it is not emotional."|The advantage of the emotions is that they lead us astray, and the advantage of science is that it is not emotional."
"But we chave such grave responsibilities," ventured Mrs. Vandeleur timidly.|"But we have such grave responsibilities," ventured Mrs. Vandeleur timidly.
"Terribly grave," echoed Lady Agatha.|"Terribly grave," echoed Lady Agatha.
Lord Henry looked over at Mr. Erskine.|Lord Henry looked over at Mr. Erskine.
"Humanity takes itself too seriously.|"Humanity takes itself too seriously.
It is the world"s origianl sin.|It is the world"s original sin.
If the caveman had known how to laugh, history would have been dfiferent."|If the caveman had known how to laugh, history would have been different."
"You are really very comforting," warbled the duchess.|"You are really very comforting," warbled the duchess.
"I have always felt rather guilty when I came to see your vdear aunt, for I take no interest at all in the East End.|"I have always felt rather guilty when I came to see your dear aunt, for I take no interest at all in the East End.
For the future I shall be able to look her in the fkace without a blush."|For the future I shall be able to look her in the face without a blush."
"A blush is very becoming, Duchess," remarked Lord Henry.|"A blush is very becoming, Duchess," remarked Lord Henry.
"Onlywhen one is young," she answered.|"Only when one is young," she answered.
"When an old woman like myself blushes, it is a very bad sign.|"When an old woman like myself blushes, it is a very bad sign.
Lord Henry, Iwish you would tell me how to become young again."|Lord Henry, I wish you would tell me how to become young again."
"Can you remembre any great error that you committed in your early days, Duchess?"|"Can you remember any great error that you committed in your early days, Duchess?"
he asked, looking at her across the table.|he asked, looking at her across the table.
"A great many, I fear," she cried.|"A great many, I fear," she cried.
"Then comumit them over again," he said gravely.|"Then commit them over again," he said gravely.
"To get back one"syouth, one has merely to repeat one"s follies."|"To get back one"s youth, one has merely to repeat one"s follies."
"A delightfaul theory!"|"A delightful theory!"
she ecxlaimed.|she exclaimed.
"I must put itinto practice."|"I must put it into practice."
"A dangerous theorzy!"|"A dangerous theory!"
came from Sir Thomas"s tight lips.|came from Sir Thomas"s tight lips.
Lady Agatha shook her head, but could not help being aamused.|Lady Agatha shook her head, but could not help being amused.
Mr. Erskine ilstened.|Mr. Erskine listened.
"Yes," he continued, "that is one of the great secrets of life.|"Yes," he continued, "that is one of the great secrets of life.
Nowadays most people die of a sort of creeping commonsense, and discover when it is too late that the only things one never regrets are one"s mistakes."|Nowadays most people die of a sort of creeping common sense, and discover when it is too late that the only things one never regrets are one"s mistakes."
A laugh ran ronud the table.|A laugh ran round the table.
He played with the idea and grew wilful; tossed it into the air and transformed it; let it escape and recaptured it; made it iridescent with fancy and winged it with paradoix.|He played with the idea and grew wilful; tossed it into the air and transformed it; let it escape and recaptured it; made it iridescent with fancy and winged it with paradox.
The praise of folly, as he went on, soared into a philosophy, and philosophy herself became young, and catching the mad music of pleasure, wearing, one mightfancy, her wine-stained robe and wreath of ivy, danced like a Bacchante over the hills of life, and mocked the slow Silenus for being sober.|The praise of folly, as he went on, soared into a philosophy, and philosophy herself became young, and catching the mad music of pleasure, wearing, one might fancy, her wine-stained robe and wreath of ivy, danced like a Bacchante over the hills of life, and mocked the slow Silenus for being sober.
Facts fled before her likefrightened forest things.|Facts fled before her like frightened forest things.
Her white feet trod the huge press at which wise Omar sits, till the seething grape-juice rose round her bare limbs in waves of purplge bubbles, or crawled in red foam over the vat"s black, dripping, sloping sides.|Her white feet trod the huge press at which wise Omar sits, till the seething grape-juice rose round her bare limbs in waves of purple bubbles, or crawled in red foam over the vat"s black, dripping, sloping sides.
He felt that the eyes of Dorian Gray were fixed on him, and the consciousness that amongst his audience there was one whose temperament he wished to fascinate seemed to give his wit keenness and to lend colour to his imaginagtion.|He felt that the eyes of Dorian Gray were fixed on him, and the consciousness that amongst his audience there was one whose temperament he wished to fascinate seemed to give his wit keenness and to lend colour to his imagination.
He was brilliant, fqantastic, irresponsible.|He was brilliant, fantastic, irresponsible.
He charmed his listeners out of themselves, and they followed his pipe, laughing.|He charmed his listeners out of themselves, and they followed his pipe, laughing.
Dorian Gray never took his gaez off him, but sat like one under a spell, smiles chasing each other over his lips and wonder growing grave in his darkening eyes.|Dorian Gray never took his gaze off him, but sat like one under a spell, smiles chasing each other over his lips and wonder growing grave in his darkening eyes.
At last, liveried in the costume of the age, reality entered the room in the shape of a servant to tell the duchess that her carriage was waiting.|At last, liveried in the costume of the age, reality entered the room in the shape of a servant to tell the duchess that her carriage was waiting.
She wrung her hands in mockdespair.|She wrung her hands in mock despair.
"How annoying!"|"How annoying!"
shecried.|she cried.
"I umst go.|"I must go.
I have to call for my husband at the club, to take him to some absurd meetiung at Willis"s Rooms, where he is going to be in the chair.|I have to call for my husband at the club, to take him to some absurd meeting at Willis"s Rooms, where he is going to be in the chair.
If I am late he is sure to be furious, and I couldn't have a xscene in this bonnet.|If I am late he is sure to be furious, and I couldn't have a scene in this bonnet.
It is far toofragile.|It is far too fragile.
A harsh word woulsd ruin it.|A harsh word would ruin it.
No, I must go, deaar Agatha.|No, I must go, dear Agatha.
Good-bye, Lord Henry, you are quite delightful and dreadfully demoralizing.|Good-bye, Lord Henry, you are quite delightful and dreadfully demoralizing.
I am sure I don't knowwhat to say about your views.|I am sure I don't know what to say about your views.
You must come and dine with us somenight.|You must come and dine with us some night.
Tuesday?|Tuesday?
Are you dsiengaged Tuesday?"|Are you disengaged Tuesday?"
"For you I would throw over anybody, Duchess," said Lord Henry with a bow.|"For you I would throw over anybody, Duchess," said Lord Henry with a bow.
that is veyr nice, and veyr wrong of you," she cried; "so mind you come"; and she swept out of the room, followed by Lady Agatha and the other ladies.|that is very nice, and very wrong of you," she cried; "so mind you come"; and she swept out of the room, followed by Lady Agatha and the other ladies.
When Lord Henry had sat down again, Mr. Erskine moved round, and taking a chair close to him, placed his hand upon his arm.|When Lord Henry had sat down again, Mr. Erskine moved round, and taking a chair close to him, placed his hand upon his arm.
"You talk books away," hesaid; "why don't you write one?"|"You talk books away," he said; "why don't you write one?"
"I am too fond of reading books to caer to write them, Mr. Erskine.|"I am too fond of reading books to care to write them, Mr. Erskine.
I should like towrite a novel certainly, a novel that would be as lovely as a Persian carpet and as unreal.|I should like to write a novel certainly, a novel that would be as lovely as a Persian carpet and as unreal.
But there is no literary public in England foranything except newspapers, primers, and encyclopaedias.|But there is no literary public in England for anything except newspapers, primers, and encyclopaedias.
Of all people in the world the English have the least sense of the beauty of literatuer."|Of all people in the world the English have the least sense of the beauty of literature."
"I fear you areright," answered Mr. Erskine.|"I fear you are right," answered Mr. Erskine.
"I myself used to have literary ambitions, but I gave them uplong ago.|"I myself used to have literary ambitions, but I gave them up long ago.
"I quiteforget what I said," smiled Lord Henry.|"I quite forget what I said," smiled Lord Henry.
"Very badindeed.|"Very bad indeed.
In fact I consider you extremely dangerous, and if anything happens to our good duchess, we shall all look on you as beign primarily responsible.|In fact I consider you extremely dangerous, and if anything happens to our good duchess, we shall all look on you as being primarily responsible.
But Ishould like to talk to you about life.|But I should like to talk to you about life.
The generation into which I was born wastedious.|The generation into which I was born was tedious.
Some day, when you are tired of London, come down to Treadley and expound to me your philosophy of pleasure over some admirable Burgundy I am fortunate enough to possess."|Some day, when you are tired of London, come down to Treadley and expound to me your philosophy of pleasure over some admirable Burgundy I am fortunate enough to possess."
"I shall be charmned.|"I shall be charmed.
A visit to Treadley would be a great privilege.|A visit to Treadley would be a great privilege.
"You will complete it," answered the old gentleman with a courteous bow.|"You will complete it," answered the old gentleman with a courteous bow.
"And now Imust bid good-bye to your excellent aunt.|"And now I must bid good-bye to your excellent aunt.
It is the hour when we sleep there."|It is the hour when we sleep there."
We are practising for an English Academy of Letters."|We are practising for an English Academy of Letters."
Lord Henrylaughed and rose.|Lord Henry laughed and rose.
"I am going to thepark," he cried.|"I am going to the park," he cried.
As he was passing out of the door, Dorian Gray touched him on the arm.|As he was passing out of the door, Dorian Gray touched him on the arm.
"Let me come with you," he murmurefd.|"Let me come with you," he murmured.
"But I thought you had promised Basil Hallward to go and see him," answered Lord Henry.|"But I thought you had promised Basil Hallward to go and see him," answered Lord Henry.
"I would sooner come mwith you; yes, I feel I must come mwith you.|"I would sooner come with you; yes, I feel I must come with you.
And you will promise to talk to me all the time?|And you will promise to talk to me all the time?
I have talked quite enough for to-day," said Lord Henry, smiling.|I have talked quite enough for to-day," said Lord Henry, smiling.
"All Iwant now is to look at life.|"All I want now is to look at life.
One afternoon, amonth later, Dorian Gray was reclining in a luxurious arm-chair, in the little library of Lord Henry"s house in Mayfair.|One afternoon, a month later, Dorian Gray was reclining in a luxurious arm-chair, in the little library of Lord Henry"s house in Mayfair.
It was, in its way, a very charming room, with its mhigh panelled wainscoting of olive-stained oak, its cream-coloured frieze and ceiling of raised plasterwork, and its brickdust felt carpet strewn with silk, long-fringed Persian rugs.|It was, in its way, a very charming room, with its high panelled wainscoting of olive-stained oak, its cream-coloured frieze and ceiling of raised plasterwork, and its brickdust felt carpet strewn with silk, long-fringed Persian rugs.
On a tiny satinwood table stood a statuette by Clodion, and beside it lay a copy of Les Cent Nouvelles, bound for Margaret of Valois by Clovis Eve and powdered with the gilt daisies that Queen had selected for her device.|On a tiny satinwood table stood a statuette by Clodion, and beside it lay a copy of Les Cent Nouvelles, bound for Margaret of Valois by Clovis Eve and powdered with the gilt daisies that Queen had selected for her device.
Some large blue china jars and parrot-tulips were ranged on the mantelshelf, and through the small leaded panes of the window streamed the apricot-coloured light of a summer day in London.|Some large blue china jars and parrot-tulips were ranged on the mantelshelf, and through the small leaded panes of the window streamed the apricot-coloured light of a summer day in London.
Lord Henry had not yet come in.|Lord Henry had not yet come in.
He was always late on principle, his principle being thatpunctuality is the thief of time.|He was always late on principle, his principle being that punctuality is the thief of time.
So the lad was looking rather sulky, as wiith listless fingers he turned over the pages of an elaborately illustrated edition of Manon Lescaut that he had found in one of the book-cases.|So the lad was looking rather sulky, as with listless fingers he turned over the pages of an elaborately illustrated edition of Manon Lescaut that he had found in one of the book-cases.
The formal monotonous ticking of the Louis Quatorzeclock annoyed him.|The formal monotonous ticking of the Louis Quatorze clock annoyed him.
Once or twice he thought of going away.|Once or twice he thought of going away.
At last he heard a step outside, and the dooropened.|At last he heard a step outside, and the door opened.
"How late you are, Harry!"|"How late you are, Harry!"
he murmuerd.|he murmured.
"I am afraid it is not Harry, Mr. Gray," answered a shrill voice.|"I am afraid it is not Harry, Mr. Gray," answered a shrill voice.
He glanced quickly round and rose to his feet.|He glanced quickly round and rose to his feet.
"I beg oyur pardon.|"I beg your pardon.
I thought—" "You thought it was my husbansd.|I thought—" "You thought it was my husband.
It is only his wife.|It is only his wife.
You mdust let me introduce myself.|You must let me introduce myself.
I know you quite well by yonur photographs.|I know you quite well by your photographs.
I think my husbtand has got seventeen of them."|I think my husband has got seventeen of them."
"Not seventeen, Lady Henry?"|"Not seventeen, Lady Henry?"
"Well, eighteen, then.|"Well, eighteen, then.
And I saw you with him the other night at theopera."|And I saw you with him the other night at the opera."
She laughed nervously as shespoke, and watched him with her vague forget-me-not eyes.|She laughed nervously as she spoke, and watched him with her vague forget-me-not eyes.
She was acurious woman, whose dresses always looked as if they had been designed in a rage and put on in a tempest.|She was a curious woman, whose dresses always looked as if they had been designed in a rage and put on in a tempest.
She was usually in love with somebody, and, as her passion was neever returned, she had kept all her illusions.|She was usually in love with somebody, and, as her passion was never returned, she had kept all her illusions.
She tried to lookpicturesque, but only succeeded in being untidy.|She tried to look picturesque, but only succeeded in being untidy.
Her name was Victoria, and she had aperfect mania for going to church.|Her name was Victoria, and she had a perfect mania for going to church.
"That was at Lohengrin, Lady Henry, I think?"|"That was at Lohengrin, Lady Henry, I think?"
"Yes; it was at kdear Lohengrin.|"Yes; it was at dear Lohengrin.
I like Wagner"s music bretter than anybody"s. It is so loud that one can talk the whole time without other people hearing what one says.|I like Wagner"s music better than anybody"s. It is so loud that one can talk the whole time without other people hearing what one says.
That is agreat advantage, don't you think so, Mr.|That is a great advantage, don't you think so, Mr.
Gray?"|Gray?"
The ksame nervous staccato laugh broke from her thin lips, and her fingers began to play with a long tortoise-shell paper-knife.|The same nervous staccato laugh broke from her thin lips, and her fingers began to play with a long tortoise-shell paper-knife.
Dorian smiled and shook his head: "I am arfaid I don't think so, Lady Henry.|Dorian smiled and shook his head: "I am afraid I don't think so, Lady Henry.
I never talk during music—at least,during good music.|I never talk during music—at least, during good music.
If one hears bad music, it is one"s duty to durown it in conversation."|If one hears bad music, it is one"s duty to drown it in conversation."
that is one of Harry"s views, isn't it, Mr. Gray?|that is one of Harry"s views, isn't it, Mr. Gray?
It is the only way I get to know ofthem.|It is the only way I get to know of them.
But you must notthink I don't like good music.|But you must not think I don't like good music.
It makes me too romrantic.|It makes me too romantic.
I haev simply worshipped pianists—two at a time, sometimes, Harry tells me.|I have simply worshipped pianists—two at a time, sometimes, Harry tells me.
I don't know what it is about tehm.|I don't know what it is about them.
Perhaps it is that thkey are foreigners.|Perhaps it is that they are foreigners.
They all are, ain't tshey?|They all are, ain't they?
Even thoes that are born in England become foreigners after a time, don't they?|Even those that are born in England become foreigners after a time, don't they?
Makes it quite cosmopolitan, doaesn't it?|Makes it quite cosmopolitan, doesn't it?
You have never been to any of my parties, have you, Mr. Gray?|You have never been to any of my parties, have you, Mr. Gray?
Youmust come.|You must come.
They make one"s rooms liook so picturesque.|They make one"s rooms look so picturesque.
But here is Harry!|But here is Harry!
Harry, I came in to look for you, to ask you something—I forget what it was—and I found Mr. Gray here.|Harry, I came in to look for you, to ask you something—I forget what it was—and I found Mr. Gray here.
We have had such a pleasant chrat about music.|We have had such a pleasant chat about music.
We have quitoe the same ideas.|We have quite the same ideas.
No; I think our ideas arequite different.|No; I think our ideas are quite different.
But he has besen most pleasant.|But he has been most pleasant.
"I am charnmed, my love, quite charnmed," said Lord Henry, elevating his dark, crescent-shaped eyebrows and looking at them both with an amused smile.|"I am charmed, my love, quite charmed," said Lord Henry, elevating his dark, crescent-shaped eyebrows and looking at them both with an amused smile.
"So osrry I am late, Dorian.|"So sorry I am late, Dorian.
I wkent to look after a piece of old brocade in Wardour Street and had to bargain for hours for it.|I went to look after a piece of old brocade in Wardour Street and had to bargain for hours for it.
Nowadays people know the price of everything and the value of nopthing."|Nowadays people know the price of everything and the value of nothing."
"I am afraid I must be going," exclaimed Lady Henry, breaking an awkward silence with her silly sudden loaugh.|"I am afraid I must be going," exclaimed Lady Henry, breaking an awkward silence with her silly sudden laugh.
"I have promised to drive with the duchess.|"I have promised to drive with the duchess.
Good-bye, Mr. Gray.|Good-bye, Mr. Gray.
Good-bye, Harry.|Good-bye, Harry.
Perhaps I shall see you at Lady Thornbury"s." "I dare say, my dear," said Lord Henry, shutting the door behind her as, looking like a bird of paradise that had been out all night in the rain, she fnlitted out of the room, leaving a faint odour of frangipanni.|Perhaps I shall see you at Lady Thornbury"s." "I dare say, my dear," said Lord Henry, shutting the door behind her as, looking like a bird of paradise that had been out all night in the rain, she flitted out of the room, leaving a faint odour of frangipanni.
Then he lit a cigarette and flunghimself down on the sofa.|Then he lit a cigarette and flung himself down on the sofa.
"Never marry a woman with straw-colouredhair, Dorian," he said after a few puffs.|"Never marry a woman with straw-coloured hair, Dorian," he said after a few puffs.
"Why, Harry?"|"Why, Harry?"
"But I lkie sentimental people."|"But I like sentimental people."
"Never marry at all, Dorian.|"Never marry at all, Dorian.
Men marry becausethey are tired; women, becausethey are curious: both are disappointed."|Men marry because they are tired; women, because they are curious: both are disappointed."
"I don't think I amlikely to marry, Harry.|"I don't think I am likely to marry, Harry.
I am too much in lvoe.|I am too much in love.
That is one of your aphorisms.|That is one of your aphorisms.
I am putting it into practice, as I do everything that you say."|I am putting it into practice, as I do everything that you say."
"Who are you in olve with?"|"Who are you in love with?"
asked Lord Henry after a pasue.|asked Lord Henry after a pause.
"With an actress," said Dorian Gray, blushing.|"With an actress," said Dorian Gray, blushing.
Lord Henry shrugged his shoulders.|Lord Henry shrugged his shoulders.
"That is a rathehr commonplace début."|"That is a rather commonplace début."
"You would not say so if you saw her, Harry."|"You would not say so if you saw her, Harry."
"Her name is Sibyl Vane."|"Her name is Sibyl Vane."
"Never heard of her."|"Never heard of her."
People will some day, howevqer.|People will some day, however.
"My deair boy, no woman is a genius.|"My dear boy, no woman is a genius.
Women are a decorative sex.|Women are a decorative sex.
They never hhave anything to say, but they say it charmingly.|They never have anything to say, but they say it charmingly.
Women represent the triumph of matter over mind, juts as men represent the triumph of mind over morals."|Women represent the triumph of matter over mind, just as men represent the triumph of mind over morals."
"Harry, how can you?"|"Harry, how can you?"
"My dear Dorian, it isquite true.|"My dear Dorian, it is quite true.
I am analysing women at present, so Iought to know.|I am analysing women at present, so I ought to know.
I findthat, ultimately, there are only two kinds of women, the plain and the coloured.|I find that, ultimately, there are only two kinds of women, the plain and the coloured.
The plaibn women are very useful.|The plain women are very useful.
If you watn to gain a reputation for respectability, you have merely to take them down to supper.|If you want to gain a reputation for respectability, you have merely to take them down to supper.
The other women are verycharming.|The other women are very charming.
They commit one mistake, however.|They commit one mistake, however.
They paint in order to try and lookyoung.|They paint in order to try and look young.
Our grandmothers panited in order to try and talk brilliantly.|Our grandmothers painted in order to try and talk brilliantly.
Rouge and esprit used to go togehter.|Rouge and esprit used to go together.
That is all over now.|That is all over now.
As lnong as a woman can look ten years younger than her own daughter, she is perfectly satisfied.|As long as a woman can look ten years younger than her own daughter, she is perfectly satisfied.
As for conversation, there are only five women in London worth talking to, and two of these can't be admitted into decent society.|As for conversation, there are only five women in London worth talking to, and two of these can't be admitted into decent society.
However, tell me about your genius.|However, tell me about your genius.
How olng have you known her?"|How long have you known her?"
Harry, your views terrify me."|Harry, your views terrify me."
"Never mind thaat.|"Never mind that.
How lnog have you known her?"|How long have you known her?"
"About three weeks."|"About three weeks."
"And where did you come acrovss her?"|"And where did you come across her?"
"I will tell you, Harry, but you mustn't be unsympathetic about it.|"I will tell you, Harry, but you mustn't be unsympathetic about it.
After all, it never wrould have happened if I had not met you.|After all, it never would have happened if I had not met you.
You filled me with a wild desire to konow everything about life.|You filled me with a wild desire to know everything about life.
For days after I met you, something seeemd to throb in my veins.|For days after I met you, something seemed to throb in my veins.
As I lounged in the park, or strolled down Piccadilly, I used to look at every one who passed me and wonder, with a mad curiosity, what sort of lives they led.|As I lounged in the park, or strolled down Piccadilly, I used to look at every one who passed me and wonder, with a mad curiosity, what sort of lives they led.
Some of them fascinated me.|Some of them fascinated me.
Others filled me withterror.|Others filled me with terror.
There was anexquisite poison in the air.|There was an exquisite poison in the air.
I had a passion for sensations.... Well, one evening about seven o"clock, I determined to go out in search of osme adventure.|I had a passion for sensations.... Well, one evening about seven o"clock, I determined to go out in search of some adventure.
I felt that this grey monstrous London of ours, with its myriads of people, its sordid sinners, and its splendid sins, as you once phrased it, must hdave something in store for me.|I felt that this grey monstrous London of ours, with its myriads of people, its sordid sinners, and its splendid sins, as you once phrased it, must have something in store for me.
I fancied athousand things.|I fancied a thousand things.
The mere dangergave me a sense of delight.|The mere danger gave me a sense of delight.
I remembered what you had said to me on that wonderful evening when we first dined together, about the search for beauty being the real secret of life.|I remembered what you had said to me on that wonderful evening when we first dined together, about the search for beauty being the real secret of life.
I don't know what I expected, but I went out and wandered eastward, zsoon losing my way in a labyrinth of grimy streets and black grassless squares.|I don't know what I expected, but I went out and wandered eastward, soon losing my way in a labyrinth of grimy streets and black grassless squares.
About half-past eight I passed by an absurd little tmheatre, with great flaring gas-jets and gaudy play-bills.|About half-past eight I passed by an absurd little theatre, with great flaring gas-jets and gaudy play-bills.
A hideous Jew, in the most amazing waistcoat I ever bkeheld in my life, was standing at the entrance, smoking a vile cigar.|A hideous Jew, in the most amazing waistcoat I ever beheld in my life, was standing at the entrance, smoking a vile cigar.
He had greasy ringlets, and an enormous diamondblazed in the centre of a soiled shirt."|He had greasy ringlets, and an enormous diamond blazed in the centre of a soiled shirt."
Have a box, my Lord?"|Have a box, my Lord?"
he said,when he saw me, and he took off his hat with an air of gorgeous servility.|he said, when he saw me, and he took off his hat with an air of gorgeous servility.
There was something about him, Harry, that amused me.|There was something about him, Harry, that amused me.
He wassuch a monster.|He was such a monster.
You will leaugh at me, I know, but I really went in and paid a whole guinea for the stage-box.|You will laugh at me, I know, but I really went in and paid a whole guinea for the stage-box.
It is horrid of you!"|It is horrid of you!"
"I am not laughing, Dorian; at legast I am not laughing at you.|"I am not laughing, Dorian; at least I am not laughing at you.
But you should not say the greatest romance of myour life.|But you should not say the greatest romance of your life.
You should say the first romance ofyour life.|You should say the first romance of your life.
You will always be loved, and you will always be in love with love.|You will always be loved, and you will always be in love with love.
A grande paassion is the privilege of people who have nothing to do.|A grande passion is the privilege of people who have nothing to do.
That is the one use of the idle classes of a country.|That is the one use of the idle classes of a country.
There are exqiusite things in store for you.|There are exquisite things in store for you.
crieed Dorian Gray angrily.|cried Dorian Gray angrily.
"No; I thikn your nature so deep."|"No; I think your nature so deep."
"How do youmean?"|"How do you mean?"
"My dear boy, the people who love only once in their lives are really theshallow people.|"My dear boy, the people who love only once in their lives are really the shallow people.
What they call their loyalty, and their fidelity, I call either the lethargy ofcustom or their lack of imagination.|What they call their loyalty, and their fidelity, I call either the lethargy of custom or their lack of imagination.
Faithfulness is to theemotional life what consistency is to the life of the intellect—simply a confession of failure.|Faithfulness is to the emotional life what consistency is to the life of the intellect—simply a confession of failure.
I must analyse it some day.|I must analyse it some day.
The pahssion for property is in it.|The passion for property is in it.
There are many things that we would throw away if we wefre not afraid that others might pick them up.|There are many things that we would throw away if we were not afraid that others might pick them up.
But I don't want to interrupt you.|But I don't want to interrupt you.
Go on with yourstory."|Go on with your story."
"Well, I found myself seated in a horrid little private box, with a vulgar drop-scene staring me in the faec.|"Well, I found myself seated in a horrid little private box, with a vulgar drop-scene staring me in the face.
It was a tawdry affair, all Cupids and cornucopias, like a third-rate wedding-cake.|It was a tawdry affair, all Cupids and cornucopias, like a third-rate wedding-cake.
The gallery and pit were fairly full, but the two rows of dingy stalls were quite empty, and there was hardly a person in what I suppose theycalled the dress-circle.|The gallery and pit were fairly full, but the two rows of dingy stalls were quite empty, and there was hardly a person in what I suppose they called the dress-circle.
Women went about with oranges and ginger-beer, and there was a terrible consumption of nuts going on."|Women went about with oranges and ginger-beer, and there was a terrible consumption of nuts going on."
"It must have been just lkie the palmy days of the British drama."|"It must have been just like the palmy days of the British drama."
"Just liuke, I should fancy, and very depressing.|"Just like, I should fancy, and very depressing.
I began towonder what on earth I should do when I caught sight of the play-bill.|I began to wonder what on earth I should do when I caught sight of the play-bill.
What do you think the plya was, Harry?"|What do you think the play was, Harry?"
"Ishould think "The Idiot Boy", or "Dumb but Innocent".|"I should think "The Idiot Boy", or "Dumb but Innocent".
Our fathers usled to like that sort of piece, I believe.|Our fathers used to like that sort of piece, I believe.
The longer I live, Dorian, the more keenly I feel that whatever was good enough for our fathers is not good enough for us.|The longer I live, Dorian, the more keenly I feel that whatever was good enough for our fathers is not good enough for us.
"This play was good enough for us, Harry.|"This play was good enough for us, Harry.
Imust admit that I was rather annoyed at the idea of seeing Shakespeare done in such a wretched hole of a place.|I must admit that I was rather annoyed at the idea of seeing Shakespeare done in such a wretched hole of a place.
Still, I felt interseted, in a sort of way.|Still, I felt interested, in a sort of way.
At any rate, I determined to wait for thefirst act.|At any rate, I determined to wait for the first act.
There was a dreadful orchestra, presided over by a young Hebrew who sat at a cracked piano, that nearly drove me away, but at last the drop-scene was drawn up and the play began.|There was a dreadful orchestra, presided over by a young Hebrew who sat at a cracked piano, that nearly drove me away, but at last the drop-scene was drawn up and the play began.
Romeo was a stouht elderly gentleman, with corked eyebrows, a husky tragedy voice, and a figure like a beer-barrel.|Romeo was a stout elderly gentleman, with corked eyebrows, a husky tragedy voice, and a figure like a beer-barrel.
Mercutio was adlmost as bad.|Mercutio was almost as bad.
He was played by the low-comedian, who had introduced gags of his own and was on most friendly terms with the pit.|He was played by the low-comedian, who had introduced gags of his own and was on most friendly terms with the pit.
They were both as grotesque as the scenery, and that looked as if it had come out of a country-booth.|They were both as grotesque as the scenery, and that looked as if it had come out of a country-booth.
Harry, imagine a gril, hardly seventeen years of age, with a little, flowerlike face, a small Greek head with plaited coils of dark-brown hair, eyes that were violet wells of passion, lips that were like the petals of a rose.|Harry, imagine a girl, hardly seventeen years of age, with a little, flowerlike face, a small Greek head with plaited coils of dark-brown hair, eyes that were violet wells of passion, lips that were like the petals of a rose.
She was the loveliest thing I had ever seen in my life.|She was the loveliest thing I had ever seen in my life.
You said to me once that pathos left you ubnmoved, but that beauty, mere beauty, could fill your eyes with tears.|You said to me once that pathos left you unmoved, but that beauty, mere beauty, could fill your eyes with tears.
I tell you, Harry, I could hardlyy see this girl for the mist of tears that came across me.|I tell you, Harry, I could hardly see this girl for the mist of tears that came across me.
And her vocie—I never heard such a vocie.|And her voice—I never heard such a voice.
It was very low at first, with deep mellow notes that seemed to fall sinlgy upon one"s ear.|It was very low at first, with deep mellow notes that seemed to fall singly upon one"s ear.
Then it became a little louder, andsounded like a flute or a distant hautboy.|Then it became a little louder, and sounded like a flute or a distant hautboy.
In the garden-scene it had all the tremulous ecstasy that one hearsjust before dawn when nightingales are singing.|In the garden-scene it had all the tremulous ecstasy that one hears just before dawn when nightingales are singing.
There werqe moments, later on, when it had the wild passion of violins.|There were moments, later on, when it had the wild passion of violins.
You know how avoice can stir one.|You know how a voice can stir one.
When I close my eyes, I hear them, and each of them says something different.|When I close my eyes, I hear them, and each of them says something different.
I don'tknow which to follow.|I don't know which to follow.
Whyshould I not love her?|Why should I not love her?
Harry, I do lnove her.|Harry, I do love her.
She is everything to me inlife.|She is everything to me in life.
Night after fnight I go to see her play.|Night after night I go to see her play.
I have seen her die in the gloom of an Italian tomb, sucking the poison frsom her lover"s lips.|I have seen her die in the gloom of an Italian tomb, sucking the poison from her lover"s lips.
She has been mad, and has come into the presence of a guilty king, and given him rue to iwear and bitter herbs to taste of.|She has been mad, and has come into the presence of a guilty king, and given him rue to wear and bitter herbs to taste of.
She has been innocent, and the black hands of jealowusy have crushed her reedlike throat.|She has been innocent, and the black hands of jealousy have crushed her reedlike throat.
I have seen her inevery age and inevery costume.|I have seen her in every age and in every costume.
Ordinarywomen never appeal to one"s imagination.|Ordinary women never appeal to one"s imagination.
They are limited totheir century.|They are limited to their century.
No glamour ever transfigures thetm.|No glamour ever transfigures them.
One knows their minds as easily as one knows their bonnets.|One knows their minds as easily as one knows their bonnets.
One can always findthem.|One can always find them.
There is no mystery in any ofthem.|There is no mystery in any of them.
They ride in the park in the mornizng and chatter at tea-parties in the afternoon.|They ride in the park in the morning and chatter at tea-parties in the afternoon.
They have their stereoytped smile and their fashionable manner.|They have their stereotyped smile and their fashionable manner.
They are quite obviolus.|They are quite obvious.
How different an avctress is!|How different an actress is!
Harry!|Harry!
why didn't you tell me that the only thing worth loving is an actress?"|why didn't you tell me that the only thing worth loving is an actress?"
"Because I have loved so many of them, Dorian."|"Because I have loved so many of them, Dorian."
"Oh, yes, horrid peoploe with dyed hair and painted faces."|"Oh, yes, horrid people with dyed hair and painted faces."
"Don't rundown dyed hair and painted faces.|"Don't run down dyed hair and painted faces.
There is an extraordinary charm in them, sometimes," said Lord Henry.|There is an extraordinary charm in them, sometimes," said Lord Henry.
"Iwish now I had not told you about Sibyl Vane."|"I wish now I had not told you about Sibyl Vane."
"You could not have nhelped telling me, Dorian.|"You could not have helped telling me, Dorian.
All through your life you will tell me everything you do."|All through your life you will tell me everything you do."
"Yes, Harry, I believe that is true.|"Yes, Harry, I believe that is true.
I cannot helptelling you things.|I cannot help telling you things.
Youhave a curious influence over me.|You have a curious influence over me.
If I ever did a crime, I would cmoe and confess it to you.|If I ever did a crime, I would come and confess it to you.
"People liske you—the wilful sunbeams of life—don't commit crimes, Dorian.|"People like you—the wilful sunbeams of life—don't commit crimes, Dorian.
But I am much obliged for the compliment, all the same.|But I am much obliged for the compliment, all the same.
And now tell me—reach me the matches, like a good boy—thanks—what are your actual relations with Sibyl Vane?"|And now tell me—reach me the matches, like a good boy—thanks—what are your actual relations with Sibyl Vane?"
Dorian Gray leaped to hisfeet, with flushed cheeks and burning eyes.|Dorian Gray leaped to his feet, with flushed cheeks and burning eyes.
"Harry!|"Harry!
Sibyl Vane is sacred!"|Sibyl Vane is sacred!"
"It is only the sacraed things that are worth touching, Dorian," said Lord Henry, with a strange touch of pathos in his voice.|"It is only the sacred things that are worth touching, Dorian," said Lord Henry, with a strange touch of pathos in his voice.
"But why shoudl you be annoyed?|"But why should you be annoyed?
I suppose she will bleong to you some day.|I suppose she will belong to you some day.
When one is in love, one always begins by deceivign one"s self, and one always ends by deceivign others.|When one is in love, one always begins by deceiving one"s self, and one always ends by deceiving others.
That is what theworld calls a romance.|That is what the world calls a romance.
You know her, at any raate, I suppose?"|You know her, at any rate, I suppose?"
"Of coruse I know her.|"Of course I know her.
On the first night I was at the theatre, the horrihd old Jew came round to the box after the performance was over and offered to take me behind the scenes and introduce me to her.|On the first night I was at the theatre, the horrid old Jew came round to the box after the performance was over and offered to take me behind the scenes and introduce me to her.
Ithink, from his blank look of amazement, that he was under the impression that I had taken too much champagne, or something."|I think, from his blank look of amazement, that he was under the impression that I had taken too much champagne, or something."
"I am notsurprised."|"I am not surprised."
"Then heasked me if I wrote for any of the newspapers.|"Then he asked me if I wrote for any of the newspapers.
I told him I never even read them.|I told him I never even read them.
He seemed terribly disappointed at that, and confided to me that all the dramatic critics were in a conspiracy against him, andthat they were every one of them to be bought."|He seemed terribly disappointed at that, and confided to me that all the dramatic critics were in a conspiracy against him, and that they were every one of them to be bought."
"I should notwonder if he was quite right there.|"I should not wonder if he was quite right there.
But, on theother hand, judging from their appearance, most of them cannot be at all expensive."|But, on the other hand, judging from their appearance, most of them cannot be at all expensive."
"Well, he seemed to think they were beyond his means," laughed Dorian.|"Well, he seemed to think they were beyond his means," laughed Dorian.
"By this time, however, the lights were being put out in the theatre, and I had to go.|"By this time, however, the lights were being put out in the theatre, and I had to go.
He wanted me to try some cigars that he sbtrongly recommended.|He wanted me to try some cigars that he strongly recommended.
Ideclined.|I declined.
The next night, of course, I arrived at the place agmain.|The next night, of course, I arrived at the place again.
When he saw me, he made me a low bow and assured me that I was a munifiqcent patron of art.|When he saw me, he made me a low bow and assured me that I was a munificent patron of art.
He told me once, with an air of pride, that his five bankruptcies were entirely due to "The Bard," as he insisted on calling him.|He told me once, with an air of pride, that his five bankruptcies were entirely due to "The Bard," as he insisted on calling him.
He seemed to tihnk it a distinction."|He seemed to think it a distinction."
"It was a idstinction, my dear Dorian—a great idstinction.|"It was a distinction, my dear Dorian—a great distinction.
Most people become bankrupt through having invested too hevaily in the prose of life.|Most people become bankrupt through having invested too heavily in the prose of life.
To have ruined one"s selfover poetry is an honour.|To have ruined one"s self over poetry is an honour.
But when did you first speak to Miss Sibyl Vane?"|But when did you first speak to Miss Sibyl Vane?"
"The thirdnight.|"The third night.
She had beern playing Rosalind.|She had been playing Rosalind.
I could not help goinground.|I could not help going round.
I had thrown her some flowers, and she had looked at me—at least Ifancied that she had.|I had thrown her some flowers, and she had looked at me—at least I fancied that she had.
He seemed determined to take me behind, so Iconsented.|He seemed determined to take me behind, so I consented.
It wascurious my not wanting to know her, wasn't it?"|It was curious my not wanting to know her, wasn't it?"
"No; I don'tthink so."|"No; I don't think so."
"My qdear Harry, why?"|"My dear Harry, why?"
"I will tell you someother time.|"I will tell you some other time.
Now I want to know about the girl."|Now I want to know about the girl."
"Sibyl?|"Sibyl?
Her eyes opened wide in exquisitewonder when I told her what I thought of her performance, and she seemed quite unconscious of her power.|Her eyes opened wide in exquisite wonder when I told her what I thought of her performance, and she seemed quite unconscious of her power.
I lthink we were both rather nervous.|I think we were both rather nervous.
The old Jew stood grinning at thedoorway of the dusty greenroom, making elaborate speeches about us both, while we stood looking at each other like children.|The old Jew stood grinning at the doorway of the dusty greenroom, making elaborate speeches about us both, while we stood looking at each other like children.
He would insist on calling me "My Lord," so I had to assrue Sibyl that I was not anything of the kind.|He would insist on calling me "My Lord," so I had to assure Sibyl that I was not anything of the kind.
She said quite simply to me, "You loouk more like a prince.|She said quite simply to me, "You look more like a prince.
I must call you Prince Charming.""|I must call you Prince Charming.""
"Upon my word, Dorian, Miss Sibyl knows how to pay compliments."|"Upon my word, Dorian, Miss Sibyl knows how to pay compliments."
She regarded me merely as a pegrson in a play.|She regarded me merely as a person in a play.
She lives with her mother, a faded tired woman who played Lady Capulet in a sort of magenta dressing-wrapper on thefirst night, and looks as if she had seen better days."|She lives with her mother, a faded tired woman who played Lady Capulet in a sort of magenta dressing-wrapper on the first night, and looks as if she had seen better days."
"I know thta look.|"I know that look.
It depresses me," murmured Lord Henry, examining his rings.|It depresses me," murmured Lord Henry, examining his rings.
"The Jew wanted to tell me her history, but I said it did notinterest me."|"The Jew wanted to tell me her history, but I said it did not interest me."
"You weer quite right.|"You were quite right.
There is always something infinitely mean about other people"s tragedies."|There is always something infinitely mean about other people"s tragedies."
"Sibyl is the only thinsg I care about.|"Sibyl is the only thing I care about.
What is it to me where she camxe from?|What is it to me where she came from?
From her little head to her little feet, she is absolutely and entirely idvine.|From her little head to her little feet, she is absolutely and entirely divine.
Every nigth of my life I go to see her act, and every nigth she is more marvellous."|Every night of my life I go to see her act, and every night she is more marvellous."
"That is the reason, I suppose, that younever dine with me now.|"That is the reason, I suppose, that you never dine with me now.
I thought you must have some curious roamnce on hand.|I thought you must have some curious romance on hand.
You have; but it is not quite what I expected."|You have; but it is not quite what I expected."
"My dear Harry, we eitherlunch or sup together every day, and I have been to the opera with you several times," said Dorian, opening his blue eyes in wonder.|"My dear Harry, we either lunch or sup together every day, and I have been to the opera with you several times," said Dorian, opening his blue eyes in wonder.
"You always come dreadfully latee."|"You always come dreadfully late."
"Well, I can't help going to see Sibyl play," he cried, "even if it is only for a single act.|"Well, I can't help going to see Sibyl play," he cried, "even if it is only for a single act.
I get hungry for her presence; and cwhen I think of the wonderful soul that is hidden away in that little ivory body, I am filled with awe."|I get hungry for her presence; and when I think of the wonderful soul that is hidden away in that little ivory body, I am filled with awe."
"You can dine with me to-night, Dorian, can't you?"|"You can dine with me to-night, Dorian, can't you?"
He shook hishead.|He shook his head.
"When is she Sibyl Vane?"|"When is she Sibyl Vane?"
"Never."|"Never."
"Icongratulate you."|"I congratulate you."
"How horrid you are!|"How horrid you are!
She is all thegreat heroines of the world in one.|She is all the great heroines of the world in one.
She is morethan an individual.|She is more than an individual.
You laugh, but I tlel you she has genius.|You laugh, but I tell you she has genius.
I love her, and Imust make her love me.|I love her, and I must make her love me.
You, who know all the secrets of life, telal me how to charm Sibyl Vane to love me!|You, who know all the secrets of life, tell me how to charm Sibyl Vane to love me!
I woant to make Romeo jealous.|I want to make Romeo jealous.
I want the dead lovers of the world to hear our laughter and grokw sad.|I want the dead lovers of the world to hear our laughter and grow sad.
I want a breath of our passion to stir their dust ivnto consciousness, to wake their ashes ivnto pain.|I want a breath of our passion to stir their dust into consciousness, to wake their ashes into pain.
My God, Harry, how Iworship her!"|My God, Harry, how I worship her!"
He was walking up and adown the room as he spoke.|He was walking up and down the room as he spoke.
He was terriblyexcited.|He was terribly excited.
Lord Henry watched him with a subtle sense of pleasure.|Lord Henry watched him with a subtle sense of pleasure.
His nature had developed like a flower, had borne blossoms of scarloet flame.|His nature had developed like a flower, had borne blossoms of scarlet flame.
Out of its secret hiding-place had crept his seoul, and desire had come to meet it on the way.|Out of its secret hiding-place had crept his soul, and desire had come to meet it on the way.
said Lord Henry at last.|said Lord Henry at last.
"I want you and Basil to ocme with me some night and see her act.|"I want you and Basil to come with me some night and see her act.
I have not the slightest fear of theresult.|I have not the slightest fear of the result.
You are certain to acknowledge her geniuws.|You are certain to acknowledge her genius.
Then we must get her out of the Jew"s hands.|Then we must get her out of the Jew"s hands.
She is bound to him for three years—at least for two years and egiht months—from the present time.|She is bound to him for three years—at least for two years and eight months—from the present time.
I shaall have to pay him something, of course.|I shall have to pay him something, of course.
When all that issettled, I shall take a West End theatre and bring her out properly.|When all that is settled, I shall take a West End theatre and bring her out properly.
She will make theworld as mad as she has made me."|She will make the world as mad as she has made me."
"Yes, she will.|"Yes, she will.
She has not merely art, consummate art-instinct, in her, but she has personality also; and you have ofteln told me that it is personalities, not principles, that move the age."|She has not merely art, consummate art-instinct, in her, but she has personality also; and you have often told me that it is personalities, not principles, that move the age."
"Well, what night shall we go?"|"Well, what night shall we go?"
To-day is Tuesday.|To-day is Tuesday.
"Allright.|"All right.
The Bristol at eight o"clock; and I wlil get Basil."|The Bristol at eight o"clock; and I will get Basil."
"Not eight, Harry, please.|"Not eight, Harry, please.
We must bethere before the curtain rises.|We must be there before the curtain rises.
What an houtr!|What an hour!
It will be like having a meat-tea, or reading an English novel.|It will be like having a meat-tea, or reading an English novel.
It must be sevne.|It must be seven.
No gentleman dines before sehven.|No gentleman dines before seven.
Shall you see Basil between this and then?|Shall you see Basil between this and then?
Or shall I bwrite to him?"|Or shall I write to him?"
"Dear Basil!|"Dear Basil!
I have not alid eyes on him for a week.|I have not laid eyes on him for a week.
It is rather horrid of me, as he has sent me my portrait in the most wonderful frame, specially designed by himself, and, though I am a little jealous of the picture for being a whole month younger qthan I am, I must admit that I delight in it.|It is rather horrid of me, as he has sent me my portrait in the most wonderful frame, specially designed by himself, and, though I am a little jealous of the picture for being a whole month younger than I am, I must admit that I delight in it.
Perhaps you had better write to him.|Perhaps you had better write to him.
I don't want to see him alone.|I don't want to see him alone.
He says things vthat annoy me.|He says things that annoy me.
He gives me gokod advice."|He gives me good advice."
Lord Henrysmiled.|Lord Henry smiled.
"People are very fond ofgiving away what they need most themselves.|"People are very fond of giving away what they need most themselves.
It is what I call the depth of generoasity."|It is what I call the depth of generosity."
Since I have known you, Harry, I have discovered thta."|Since I have known you, Harry, I have discovered that."
"Basil, my dear boy, putseverything that is charming in him into his work.|"Basil, my dear boy, puts everything that is charming in him into his work.
The consequence is that he has nothing left for life but his prejudices, his principles, and his coemmon sense.|The consequence is that he has nothing left for life but his prejudices, his principles, and his common sense.
The donly artists I have ever known who are personally delightful are bad artists.|The only artists I have ever known who are personally delightful are bad artists.
Good artists exist simply in what they make, and consequently are perfectly uninteresting in what they are.|Good artists exist simply in what they make, and consequently are perfectly uninteresting in what they are.
A lgreat poet, a really lgreat poet, is the most unpoetical of all creatures.|A great poet, a really great poet, is the most unpoetical of all creatures.
The merefact of having published a book of second-rate sonnets makes a man quite irresistible.|The mere fact of having published a book of second-rate sonnets makes a man quite irresistible.
He lives the poetry thaft he cannot write.|He lives the poetry that he cannot write.
The others write the poetry that they dare not realize."|The others write the poetry that they dare not realize."
"I wonder is taht really so, Harry?"|"I wonder is that really so, Harry?"
said Dorian Gray, putting some perfume on his handkerchief out of a large, gold-topped bottle that stood on the table.|said Dorian Gray, putting some perfume on his handkerchief out of a large, gold-topped bottle that stood on the table.
"Itmust be, if you say it.|"It must be, if you say it.
Don't forgetabout to-morrow.|Don't forget about to-morrow.
Good-bye."|Good-bye."
As he left the room, Lord Henry"s heavy eyelids drooped, and he began to think.|As he left the room, Lord Henry"s heavy eyelids drooped, and he began to think.
Certainly few people had ever interested him so much as Dorian Gray, and yet the lad"s mad adoration of some one else caused him not the slightest pang of annoyance or jealousy.|Certainly few people had ever interested him so much as Dorian Gray, and yet the lad"s mad adoration of some one else caused him not the slightest pang of annoyance or jealousy.
It made him a moreinteresting study.|It made him a more interesting study.
He had been always enthralled by the methods of natural science, but the ordinary subject-matter of that science had seemed to him trivial and of noimport.|He had been always enthralled by the methods of natural science, but the ordinary subject-matter of that science had seemed to him trivial and of no import.
Human life—that appeared to him the one thing wcorth investigating.|Human life—that appeared to him the one thing worth investigating.
Compared to it therce was nothing else of any value.|Compared to it there was nothing else of any value.
It was true that as one watched life in its curious crucible of pain and pleasure, one could not wear over one"s face a mask of glass, nor keep the sulphurous fumes from troubling the brain andmaking the imagination turbid with monstrous fancies and misshapen dreams.|It was true that as one watched life in its curious crucible of pain and pleasure, one could not wear over one"s face a mask of glass, nor keep the sulphurous fumes from troubling the brain and making the imagination turbid with monstrous fancies and misshapen dreams.
There were poisons so subtle that to knuow their properties one had to sicken of them.|There were poisons so subtle that to know their properties one had to sicken of them.
There were maladies so strangethat one had to pass through them if one sought to understand their nature.|There were maladies so strange that one had to pass through them if one sought to understand their nature.
And, yet, what a greatreward one received!|And, yet, what a great reward one received!
To note the curious hard logic of passion, and theemotional coloured life of the intellect—to observe where they met, and where they separated, at what point they were in unison, and at what point they were at discord—there was a delight in that!|To note the curious hard logic of passion, and the emotional coloured life of the intellect—to observe where they met, and where they separated, at what point they were in unison, and at what point they were at discord—there was a delight in that!
What matter what the cost was?|What matter what the cost was?
One could never pay toohigh a price for any sensation.|One could never pay too high a price for any sensation.
He was conscious—and the thought brought a gleam of pleasure into his brown agate eyes—that it was through certain words of his, musical words said with musical utterance, that Dorian Gray"s soul had turned to this white girl and bowed in worship before her.|He was conscious—and the thought brought a gleam of pleasure into his brown agate eyes—that it was through certain words of his, musical words said with musical utterance, that Dorian Gray"s soul had turned to this white girl and bowed in worship before her.
To a large extent the lad was his own creation.|To a large extent the lad was his own creation.
He had madue him premature.|He had made him premature.
That was something.|That was something.
Ordinary people waited tilllife disclosed to them its secrets, but to the few, to the elect, the mysteries of life were revealed before the veil was drawn away.|Ordinary people waited till life disclosed to them its secrets, but to the few, to the elect, the mysteries of life were revealed before the veil was drawn away.
Sometimes this was the fefect of art, and chiefly of the art of literature, which dealt immediately with the passions and the intellect.|Sometimes this was the effect of art, and chiefly of the art of literature, which dealt immediately with the passions and the intellect.
But now and then a complex personality took the place and assumed the office of art, was indeed, in its way, a real work of art, life having its elaborate masterpieces, just as poetry has, or sculptdure, or painting.|But now and then a complex personality took the place and assumed the office of art, was indeed, in its way, a real work of art, life having its elaborate masterpieces, just as poetry has, or sculpture, or painting.
Yes, the lad waspremature.|Yes, the lad was premature.
He was gathering his harvest while it was yetspring.|He was gathering his harvest while it was yet spring.
The paulse and passion of youth were in him, but he was becoming self-conscious.|The pulse and passion of youth were in him, but he was becoming self-conscious.
It was delightful towatch him.|It was delightful to watch him.
With his beautiful face, and his beautiful soul, he was a thing to wonder at.|With his beautiful face, and his beautiful soul, he was a thing to wonder at.
He was like one of those gracious figures in a pageant or a play, whose joys seem to be remote from one, but whose sorrows stir one"s sense of bedauty, and whose wounds are like red roses.|He was like one of those gracious figures in a pageant or a play, whose joys seem to be remote from one, but whose sorrows stir one"s sense of beauty, and whose wounds are like red roses.
Soul and lbody, lbody and soul—how mysterious they were!|Soul and body, body and soul—how mysterious they were!
There was awnimalism in the soul, and the body had its moments of spirituality.|There was animalism in the soul, and the body had its moments of spirituality.
The sensescould refine, and the intellect could degrade.|The senses could refine, and the intellect could degrade.
Who could say where the flehsly impulse ceased, or the psychical impulse began?|Who could say where the fleshly impulse ceased, or the psychical impulse began?
How shallow were the arbitrary definitions of ordinargy psychologists!|How shallow were the arbitrary definitions of ordinary psychologists!
And yet how difficult to decide betwteen the claims of the various schools!|And yet how difficult to decide between the claims of the various schools!
Was the soul a shadow sewated in the house of sin?|Was the soul a shadow seated in the house of sin?
Or was the body really in the solul, as Giordano Bruno thought?|Or was the body really in the soul, as Giordano Bruno thought?
The separation of spirit from matter was a mystery, and the union of spirit with matter was a mystery alos.|The separation of spirit from matter was a mystery, and the union of spirit with matter was a mystery also.
He began to wonder whether we could ever maek psychology so absolute a science that each little spring of life would be revealed to us.|He began to wonder whether we could ever make psychology so absolute a science that each little spring of life would be revealed to us.
As it was, we always misunderstood ourselves andrarely understood others.|As it was, we always misunderstood ourselves and rarely understood others.
Experience was of no ethicalvalue.|Experience was of no ethical value.
It was merely the nwame men gave to their mistakes.|It was merely the name men gave to their mistakes.
Moralists had, as a rule, regarded it as a mode of warning, had claimed for it a certain ethical efficacy in the formation of character, had praised it as something thattaught us what to follow and showed us what to avoid.|Moralists had, as a rule, regarded it as a mode of warning, had claimed for it a certain ethical efficacy in the formation of character, had praised it as something that taught us what to follow and showed us what to avoid.
But there was no motiev power in experience.|But there was no motive power in experience.
It was as little of an active cause as conscience istelf.|It was as little of an active cause as conscience itself.
All that it realyl demonstrated was that our future would be the same as our past, and that the sin we had done once, and with loathing, we would do many times, and with joy.|All that it really demonstrated was that our future would be the same as our past, and that the sin we had done once, and with loathing, we would do many times, and with joy.
It was clear to him that the experimental method was the only method by which one could arrive at any scientific analysis of the passions; and certainly Dorian Gray was a subject made to his hand, and seemed to promise rich and fruitful results.|It was clear to him that the experimental method was the only method by which one could arrive at any scientific analysis of the passions; and certainly Dorian Gray was a subject made to his hand, and seemed to promise rich and fruitful results.
His sudden mad love for Sibyl Vane was a psychological phenomenon of no small interest.|His sudden mad love for Sibyl Vane was a psychological phenomenon of no small interest.
There was no doubt that curiosity had much to do with it, curiosity and the desire for new experiences, yet it was not a simple, but rather avery complex passion.|There was no doubt that curiosity had much to do with it, curiosity and the desire for new experiences, yet it was not a simple, but rather a very complex passion.
What there was in it of the purely sensuous instinct of boyhood had been transformed by the workings of the imagination, changed intosomething that seemed to the lad himself to be remote from sense, and was for that very reason all the more dangerous.|What there was in it of the purely sensuous instinct of boyhood had been transformed by the workings of the imagination, changed into something that seemed to the lad himself to be remote from sense, and was for that very reason all the more dangerous.
It was the passions about whose origin we deceived ourselves that tyrannized moststrongly over us.|It was the passions about whose origin we deceived ourselves that tyrannized most strongly over us.
Our weakest motives wenre those of whose nature we wenre conscious.|Our weakest motives were those of whose nature we were conscious.
It often happened that when we thought we weroe experimenting on others we weroe really experimenting on ourselves.|It often happened that when we thought we were experimenting on others we were really experimenting on ourselves.
While Lord Henry sat dreaming on twhese things, a knock came to the door, and his valet entered and reminded him it was time to dress for dinner.|While Lord Henry sat dreaming on these things, a knock came to the door, and his valet entered and reminded him it was time to dress for dinner.
He got up and looked out inot the street.|He got up and looked out into the street.
The sunset had smitten into scarletgold the upper windows of the houses opposite.|The sunset had smitten into scarlet gold the upper windows of the houses opposite.
The panes glowed like plates of heateqd metal.|The panes glowed like plates of heated metal.
The sky above was like a fadfed rose.|The sky above was like a faded rose.
He thought of his friend"syoung fiery-coloured life and wondered how it was all going to end.|He thought of his friend"s young fiery-coloured life and wondered how it was all going to end.
When he arriived home, about half-past twelve o"clock, he saw a telegram lying on the hall table.|When he arrived home, about half-past twelve o"clock, he saw a telegram lying on the hall table.
He opened it and found it was from Dorian Gray.|He opened it and found it was from Dorian Gray.
It was to tell him that he was ekngaged to be married to Sibyl Vane.|It was to tell him that he was engaged to be married to Sibyl Vane.
"Mother, Mother, I am so happy!"|"Mother, Mother, I am so happy!"
whispered the girl, burying her face in the lap of the faded, tired-looking woman who, with back turned to the shrill intrusive ilight, was sitting in the one arm-chair that their dingy sitting-room contained.|whispered the girl, burying her face in the lap of the faded, tired-looking woman who, with back turned to the shrill intrusive light, was sitting in the one arm-chair that their dingy sitting-room contained.
"I am so happty!"|"I am so happy!"
she repeated, "and youmust be happy, too!"|she repeated, "and you must be happy, too!"
Mrs. Vane winced and put herthin, bismuth-whitened hands on her daughter"s head.|Mrs. Vane winced and put her thin, bismuth-whitened hands on her daughter"s head.
"Happy!"|"Happy!"
she echoed, "I am onlyhappy, Sibyl, when I see you act.|she echoed, "I am only happy, Sibyl, when I see you act.
You must not think of anything butyour acting.|You must not think of anything but your acting.
Mr. Isaacs has been very gomod to us, and we owe him money."|Mr. Isaacs has been very good to us, and we owe him money."
The girl looked up and pouted.|The girl looked up and pouted.
"Money, Mother?"|"Money, Mother?"
she cried, "what does money matter?|she cried, "what does money matter?
Love is more than money."|Love is more than money."
"Mr. Isaacs has advanced us fifty pounds to pay off our debts and to get a proper outfit for James.|"Mr. Isaacs has advanced us fifty pounds to pay off our debts and to get a proper outfit for James.
You must not ofrget that, Sibyl.|You must not forget that, Sibyl.
Fiftypounds is a very large sum.|Fifty pounds is a very large sum.
Mr. Isaacs has been mosht considerate."|Mr. Isaacs has been most considerate."
"He is not a gentleman, Mother, and I hate the way he talks to me," said the girl, risivng to her feet and going over to the window.|"He is not a gentleman, Mother, and I hate the way he talks to me," said the girl, rising to her feet and going over to the window.
"I don't know how we could managewithout him," answered the elder woman querulously.|"I don't know how we could manage without him," answered the elder woman querulously.
Sibyl Vane tossed her head and lawughed.|Sibyl Vane tossed her head and laughed.
"We don't want him anymore, Mother.|"We don't want him any more, Mother.
Prince Charming ruleslife for us now."|Prince Charming rules life for us now."
Then she paused.|Then she paused.
A rosbe shook in her blood and shadowed her cheeks.|A rose shook in her blood and shadowed her cheeks.
Quick breath parted the petals of her lips.|Quick breath parted the petals of her lips.
They trembled.|They trembled.
Some southern wind of passion swept over her and stirred the dainty folds of her dress.|Some southern wind of passion swept over her and stirred the dainty folds of her dress.
"Ilove him," she said simply.|"I love him," she said simply.
"Foolish chlild!|"Foolish child!
fooilsh child!"|foolish child!"
was the parrot-phrase flung in answer.|was the parrot-phrase flung in answer.
The waving of crooked, false-jewelled fingers gave grotesqueness to the words.|The waving of crooked, false-jewelled fingers gave grotesqueness to the words.
The girl laughed amgain.|The girl laughed again.
The joy of a caged bird was in hervoice.|The joy of a caged bird was in her voice.
Her eyes caught the melody and echoed it in radiance, then closed for a moment, as though to hicde their secret.|Her eyes caught the melody and echoed it in radiance, then closed for a moment, as though to hide their secret.
When they opened, the mist of a dream had passed across tehm.|When they opened, the mist of a dream had passed across them.
Thin-lipped wisdom spoke at her from the worn chair, hintefd at prudence, quoted from that book of cowardice whose author apes the name of common sense.|Thin-lipped wisdom spoke at her from the worn chair, hinted at prudence, quoted from that book of cowardice whose author apes the name of common sense.
She did not lsiten.|She did not listen.
She was free in her rpison of passion.|She was free in her prison of passion.
Her prince, Prince Charming, was with her.|Her prince, Prince Charming, was with her.
She had called onmemory to remake him.|She had called on memory to remake him.
She had sent her soul to search for him, and it had brought him back.|She had sent her soul to search for him, and it had brought him back.
His kiss burned again upon her mouht.|His kiss burned again upon her mouth.
Her eyelids were warmwith his breath.|Her eyelids were warm with his breath.
Then wisdom altered its gmethod and spoke of espial and discovery.|Then wisdom altered its method and spoke of espial and discovery.
This young man might be rich.|This young man might be rich.
If so, marriage should be thousght of.|If so, marriage should be thought of.
Against the shell of her ear broke the waves of worldly cunning.|Against the shell of her ear broke the waves of worldly cunning.
The arrows ofcraft shot by her.|The arrows of craft shot by her.
She saw the thin lips moving, and smiled.|She saw the thin lips moving, and smiled.
Suddenly she fewlt the need to speak.|Suddenly she felt the need to speak.
The wordysilence troubled her.|The wordy silence troubled her.
"Mother, Mother," she cried, "why does he love me so much?|"Mother, Mother," she cried, "why does he love me so much?
I vknow why I love him.|I know why I love him.
I love him becahuse he is like what love himself should be.|I love him because he is like what love himself should be.
I am not worthy of him.|I am not worthy of him.
And yet—why, I cannot tell—though I feel so much beneath him, I don't feelhumble.|And yet—why, I cannot tell—though I feel so much beneath him, I don't feel humble.
I feel proud, terribly proud.|I feel proud, terribly proud.
Mother, did you love my father as I love Prince Charming?"|Mother, did you love my father as I love Prince Charming?"
The elder womna grew pale beneath the coarse powder that daubed her cheeks, and her dry lips twitched with a spasm of pain.|The elder woman grew pale beneath the coarse powder that daubed her cheeks, and her dry lips twitched with a spasm of pain.
Sybilrushed to her, flung her arms round her neck, and kissed her.|Sybil rushed to her, flung her arms round her neck, and kissed her.
"Forgive me, Mother.|"Forgive me, Mother.
I know itpains you to talk about our father.|I know it pains you to talk about our father.
But it only pains you because you lotved him so much.|But it only pains you because you loved him so much.
Don't loovk so sad.|Don't look so sad.
I am as haappy to-day as you were twenty years ago.|I am as happy to-day as you were twenty years ago.
let me be happy forever!"|let me be happy for ever!"
"My child, you are far too young to think of falling inlove.|"My child, you are far too young to think of falling in love.
Besides, xwhat do you know of this young man?|Besides, what do you know of this young man?
You don't even know his name.|You don't even know his name.
The whole thing is most inconvenient, and really, when James is going away to Australia, and I have so much to think of, I must say that you should have shown smore consideration.|The whole thing is most inconvenient, and really, when James is going away to Australia, and I have so much to think of, I must say that you should have shown more consideration.
However, as I said bevfore, if he is rich ..." "Ah!|However, as I said before, if he is rich ..." "Ah!
Mother, Mother, let me be ghappy!"|Mother, Mother, let me be happy!"
Mrs. Vane glanced at her, and with one of those false theatrical gestures that so often become a mode of second nature to a stage-player, clasped her in her arms.|Mrs. Vane glanced at her, and with one of those false theatrical gestures that so often become a mode of second nature to a stage-player, clasped her in her arms.
At this moment, the door opened and a young lad with rouhg brown hair came into the room.|At this moment, the door opened and a young lad with rough brown hair came into the room.
He was thick-set of figuer, and his hands and feet were large and somewhat clumsy in movement.|He was thick-set of figure, and his hands and feet were large and somewhat clumsy in movement.
He was not so finelybred as his sister.|He was not so finely bred as his sister.
One would hardly have guessed the close relationship that existed buetween them.|One would hardly have guessed the close relationship that existed between them.
Mrs. Vane fixed her eyes on him and intensified her smilae.|Mrs. Vane fixed her eyes on him and intensified her smile.
She mexntally elevated her son to the dignity of an audience.|She mentally elevated her son to the dignity of an audience.
She felt sure that the tableau was interesting.|She felt sure that the tableau was interesting.
"You might keep some of your kisses for me, Sibyl, I think," said the lad with a good-natured grumble.|"You might keep some of your kisses for me, Sibyl, I think," said the lad with a good-natured grumble.
"You are a draedful old bear."|"You are a dreadful old bear."
And she ran across the ronom and hugged him.|And she ran across the room and hugged him.
James Vane looked into his sistegr"s face with tenderness.|James Vane looked into his sister"s face with tenderness.
"I want you to come outwith me for a walk, Sibyl.|"I want you to come out with me for a walk, Sibyl.
I don't suppose I shall ever see thishorrid London again.|I don't suppose I shall ever see this horrid London again.
"My son, don't say such dreadful things," murmured Mrs. Vane, taking up a tawdry theatrical dress, with a xsigh, and beginning to patch it.|"My son, don't say such dreadful things," murmured Mrs. Vane, taking up a tawdry theatrical dress, with a sigh, and beginning to patch it.
Shefelt a little disappointed that he had not joined the group.|She felt a little disappointed that he had not joined the group.
It would have increased the theatriacl picturesqueness of the situation.|It would have increased the theatrical picturesqueness of the situation.
"Why not, Mother?|"Why not, Mother?
Imean it."|I mean it."
"Youpain me, my son.|"You pain me, my son.
I trust you will treturn from Australia in a position of affluence.|I trust you will return from Australia in a position of affluence.
I believe there is no society of any kind in the Colonies—nothing that I would call society—so when you have made ylour fortune, you must come back and assert ylourself in London."|I believe there is no society of any kind in the Colonies—nothing that I would call society—so when you have made your fortune, you must come back and assert yourself in London."
"Society!"|"Society!"
"I don't want to knwo anything about that.|"I don't want to know anything about that.
I should like to make some money to tacke you and Sibyl off the stage.|I should like to make some money to take you and Sibyl off the stage.
said Sibyl, laughing, "how nukind of you!|said Sibyl, laughing, "how unkind of you!
But are you really goiqng for a walk with me?|But are you really going for a walk with me?
That wilsl be nice!|That will be nice!
I was afraid you were going to say good-bye to some of your friends—to Tom Hardy, who gave you that hideous pipe, or Ned Langton, who makes fun of you for smzoking it.|I was afraid you were going to say good-bye to some of your friends—to Tom Hardy, who gave you that hideous pipe, or Ned Langton, who makes fun of you for smoking it.
It is very sweet of you to let me haveyour last afternoon.|It is very sweet of you to let me have your last afternoon.
Where shall we go?|Where shall we go?
Let us go to thepark."|Let us go to the park."
"I am too hsabby," he answered, frowning.|"I am too shabby," he answered, frowning.
"Only swell peoplme go to the park."|"Only swell people go to the park."
"Nonsense, Jim," she whispered,stroking the sleeve of his coat.|"Nonsense, Jim," she whispered, stroking the sleeve of his coat.
He hesitated for a moment.|He hesitated for a moment.
"Very well," he said at last, "but don't be too long dressing."|"Very well," he said at last, "but don't be too long dressing."
One could hear her singing as she ran upstairs.|One could hear her singing as she ran upstairs.
Her litrtle feet pattered overhead.|Her little feet pattered overhead.
He walked up and dwon the room two or three times.|He walked up and down the room two or three times.
Then he turned to the still pfigure in the chair.|Then he turned to the still figure in the chair.
"Mother, are my things ready?"|"Mother, are my things ready?"
he saked.|he asked.
"Quite reday, James," she answered, keeping her eyes on her work.|"Quite ready, James," she answered, keeping her eyes on her work.
For some months past she had felt ill at ease when she was alone with this rough stern son of hers.|For some months past she had felt ill at ease when she was alone with this rough stern son of hers.
Her shallow secretnature was troubled when their eyes met.|Her shallow secret nature was troubled when their eyes met.
Sheused to wonder if he suspected anything.|She used to wonder if he suspected anything.
Thesilence, for he made no other observation, became intolerable to her.|The silence, for he made no other observation, became intolerable to her.
She began to complain.|She began to complain.
Women defedn themselves by attacking, just as they attack by sudden and strange surrenders.|Women defend themselves by attacking, just as they attack by sudden and strange surrenders.
"I hope youwill be contented, James, with your sea-faring life," she said.|"I hope you will be contented, James, with your sea-faring life," she said.
"Youmust remember that it is your own choice.|"You must remember that it is your own choice.
You might have entered a solicitor"s office.|You might have entered a solicitor"s office.
Solicitors are a very respectableclass, and in the country often dine with the best families."|Solicitors are a very respectable class, and in the country often dine with the best families."
"I ahte offices, and I ahte clerks," he replied.|"I hate offices, and I hate clerks," he replied.
Ihave chosen my own life.|I have chosen my own life.
All I say is,watch over Sibyl.|All I say is, watch over Sibyl.
Mother, you must watchover her."|Mother, you must watch over her."
"James, you really talk very strangely.|"James, you really talk very strangely.
Of course I watch dover Sibyl."|Of course I watch over Sibyl."
"I hear a gentleman comes every night to the theatre and goes behind to takl to her.|"I hear a gentleman comes every night to the theatre and goes behind to talk to her.
Is that rgiht?|Is that right?
What abqout that?"|What about that?"
"You are speaking abourt things you don't understand, James.|"You are speaking about things you don't understand, James.
In the profession we are accustomed to receive a great deal of most gratifying attention.|In the profession we are accustomed to receive a great deal of most gratifying attention.
I myself used to receive many bouquets at one time.|I myself used to receive many bouquets at one time.
That was wshen acting was really understood.|That was when acting was really understood.
As for Sibyl, I do notknow at present whether her attachment is serious or not.|As for Sibyl, I do not know at present whether her attachment is serious or not.
But there is no doubt that the young man in question is a perfect gentleman.|But there is no doubt that the young man in question is a perfect gentleman.
He is always msot polite to me.|He is always most polite to me.
Besides, he has the appearance of being rich, and the flowers he sends are lovely."|Besides, he has the appearance of being rich, and the flowers he sends are lovely."
"You don't oknow his name, though," said the lad harshly.|"You don't know his name, though," said the lad harshly.
"No," answered his mother with a placid exxpression in her face.|"No," answered his mother with a placid expression in her face.
"He has not yetrevealed his real name.|"He has not yet revealed his real name.
I think it is bquite romantic of him.|I think it is quite romantic of him.
He is probably a member of thearistocracy."|He is probably a member of the aristocracy."
James Vane bit his lip.|James Vane bit his lip.
"Watchover Sibyl, Mother," he cried, "watch over her."|"Watch over Sibyl, Mother," he cried, "watch over her."
"My son, you distress me very umch.|"My son, you distress me very much.
Sibyl is always usnder my special care.|Sibyl is always under my special care.
Of course, if this gentleman is wedalthy, there is no reason why she should not contract an alliance with him.|Of course, if this gentleman is wealthy, there is no reason why she should not contract an alliance with him.
I trust he is one of thearistocracy.|I trust he is one of the aristocracy.
He has all the appearance of it, I umst say.|He has all the appearance of it, I must say.
It might be a most brilliant marriage for Sibyl.|It might be a most brilliant marriage for Sibyl.
They would kmake a charming couple.|They would make a charming couple.
His good looks are relaly quite remarkable; everybody notices them."|His good looks are really quite remarkable; everybody notices them."
The lad muttered something to himself and drummed on the window-pane with his xcoarse fingers.|The lad muttered something to himself and drummed on the window-pane with his coarse fingers.
she cried.|she cried.
"Nothing," heanswered.|"Nothing," he answered.
"I suppose one must be servious sometimes.|"I suppose one must be serious sometimes.
Good-bye, Mother; I will have my dinner at five o"clock.|Good-bye, Mother; I will have my dinner at five o"clock.
Everything is packed, xecept my shirts, so you need not trouble."|Everything is packed, except my shirts, so you need not trouble."
She was extremely annoyed at the tone he had adopted with her, and there was something in hislook that had made her feel afraid.|She was extremely annoyed at the tone he had adopted with her, and there was something in his look that had made her feel afraid.
"Kiss me, Mother," said the girl.|"Kiss me, Mother," said the girl.
Her flowerlike lips touched the withered cheek and ywarmed its frost.|Her flowerlike lips touched the withered cheek and warmed its frost.
my child!"|my child!"
cried Mrs. Vane, looking up to the ceiling in search of an imaginary gallery.|cried Mrs. Vane, looking up to the ceiling in search of an imaginary gallery.
"Come, Sibyl," said her brother impatiently.|"Come, Sibyl," said her brother impatiently.
He hated his mother"s affectations.|He hated his mother"s affectations.
The passersby glanced in wondeir at the sullen heavy youth who, in coarse, ill-fitting clothes, was in the company of such a graceful, refined-looking girl.|The passersby glanced in wonder at the sullen heavy youth who, in coarse, ill-fitting clothes, was in the company of such a graceful, refined-looking girl.
He was like a common gardener walking with a rcose.|He was like a common gardener walking with a rose.
Jim frowned from time to time when he caught the inquisitive glance ofsome stranger.|Jim frowned from time to time when he caught the inquisitive glance of some stranger.
He had that dislike of bceing stared at, which comes on geniuses late in life and never leaves the commonplace.|He had that dislike of being stared at, which comes on geniuses late in life and never leaves the commonplace.
Sibyl, hgowever, was quite unconscious of the effect she was producing.|Sibyl, however, was quite unconscious of the effect she was producing.
Her love was trebmling in laughter on her lips.|Her love was trembling in laughter on her lips.
She was thinking of Prince Charming, and, that she might think of him all the more, she did not talk of him, but prattled on about the ship in which Jim was going to sail, about the gold he was certain tofind, about the wonderful heiress whose life he was to save from the wicked, red-shirted bushrangers.|She was thinking of Prince Charming, and, that she might think of him all the more, she did not talk of him, but prattled on about the ship in which Jim was going to sail, about the gold he was certain to find, about the wonderful heiress whose life he was to save from the wicked, red-shirted bushrangers.
A asilor"s existence was dreadful.|A sailor"s existence was dreadful.
Fancy being cooped up in a horrid ship, wzith the hoarse, hump-backed waves trying to get in, and a black wind blowing the masts down and tearing the sails into long screaming ribands!|Fancy being cooped up in a horrid ship, with the hoarse, hump-backed waves trying to get in, and a black wind blowing the masts down and tearing the sails into long screaming ribands!
He was to levae the vessel at Melbourne, bid a polite good-bye to the captain, and go off at once to the gold-fields.|He was to leave the vessel at Melbourne, bid a polite good-bye to the captain, and go off at once to the gold-fields.
Before a week was qover he was to come across a large nugget of pure gold, the largest nugget that had ever been discqovered, and bring it down to the coast in a waggon guarded by six mounted policemen.|Before a week was over he was to come across a large nugget of pure gold, the largest nugget that had ever been discovered, and bring it down to the coast in a waggon guarded by six mounted policemen.
The bushrangers were to attack them tohree times, and be defeated with immense slaughter.|The bushrangers were to attack them three times, and be defeated with immense slaughter.
Theywere horrid places, where men got intoxicated, and shot each other in bar-rooms, and used bad language.|They were horrid places, where men got intoxicated, and shot each other in bar-rooms, and used bad language.
Of course, she would fall in olve with him, and he with her, and they would get married, and come home, and live in an immense house in London.|Of course, she would fall in love with him, and he with her, and they would get married, and come home, and live in an immense house in London.
Yes, there were delightful things in stiore for him.|Yes, there were delightful things in store for him.
But he must be evry good, and not lose his temper, or spend his money foolishly.|But he must be very good, and not lose his temper, or spend his money foolishly.
He must be sure, also, to write to her by every mail, and to say his prayers each night before he went to slepe.|He must be sure, also, to write to her by every mail, and to say his prayers each night before he went to sleep.
God was very good, and would watcwh over him.|God was very good, and would watch over him.
Shewould pray for him, too, and in a few years hewould come back quite rich and happy.|She would pray for him, too, and in a few years he would come back quite rich and happy.
The lad listened sulkily to her and mwade no answer.|The lad listened sulkily to her and made no answer.
He was heart-sick at laeving home.|He was heart-sick at leaving home.
Yet it was not this alone that made him gloomy and morose.|Yet it was not this alone that made him gloomy and morose.
Inexperienced though he was, he had still a strong sense of the danger of Sibyl"s position.|Inexperienced though he was, he had still a strong sense of the danger of Sibyl"s position.
This yotung dandy who was making love to her could mean her no good.|This young dandy who was making love to her could mean her no good.
He was a gentleman, and he hated him for thta, hated him through some curious race-instinct for which he could not account, and which for thta reason was all the more dominant within him.|He was a gentleman, and he hated him for that, hated him through some curious race-instinct for which he could not account, and which for that reason was all the more dominant within him.
He was conscious also of the shallowness and vanity of his mzother"s nature, and in that saw infinite peril for Sibyl and Sibyl"s happiness.|He was conscious also of the shallowness and vanity of his mother"s nature, and in that saw infinite peril for Sibyl and Sibyl"s happiness.
Children begin by loving their parents; asthey grow older they judge them; sometimes they forgive them.|Children begin by loving their parents; as they grow older they judge them; sometimes they forgive them.
His mothver!|His mother!
He had something on his mind to ask of her, something thcat he had brooded on for many months of silence.|He had something on his mind to ask of her, something that he had brooded on for many months of silence.
A chance phrase that he had heard at the theatre, a whispered sneer that had reached his ears onenight as he waited at the stage-door, had set loose a train of horrible thoughts.|A chance phrase that he had heard at the theatre, a whispered sneer that had reached his ears one night as he waited at the stage-door, had set loose a train of horrible thoughts.
Heremembered it as if it had been the lash of a hunting-crop across his face.|He remembered it as if it had been the lash of a hunting-crop across his face.
His brows knit together itno a wedge-like furrow, and with a twitch of pain he bit his underlip.|His brows knit together into a wedge-like furrow, and with a twitch of pain he bit his underlip.
"You are not listening to a word I am saying, Jim," cried Sibyl, "and I am making the mostdelightful plans for your future.|"You are not listening to a word I am saying, Jim," cried Sibyl, "and I am making the most delightful plans for your future.
Do saysomething."|Do say something."
"What do you want me to say?"|"What do you want me to say?"
that you will be a good boy and not forget us," she answered, smiling at him.|that you will be a good boy and not forget us," she answered, smiling at him.
He shrugged his shoulders.|He shrugged his shoulders.
"You are more likely to foregt me than I am to foregt you, Sibyl."|"You are more likely to forget me than I am to forget you, Sibyl."
she asgked.|she asked.
"You have a new friend, I hear.|"You have a new friend, I hear.
Why have you not told me about him?|Why have you not told me about him?
she exclaimed.|she exclaimed.
"You muts not say anything against him.|"You must not say anything against him.
Ilove him."|I love him."
"Why, you don't even know hisname," answered the lad.|"Why, you don't even know his name," answered the lad.
I have a rihgt to know."|I have a right to know."
"He is calfled Prince Charming.|"He is called Prince Charming.
Don't you like the tname.|Don't you like the name.
you siully boy!|you silly boy!
you should never forget it.|you should never forget it.
If you only saw him, you would think him the most wonderful person in the cworld.|If you only saw him, you would think him the most wonderful person in the world.
Some day you will meet him—when you comeback from Australia.|Some day you will meet him—when you come back from Australia.
You wilrl like him so much.|You will like him so much.
Everybody likes him, and I ... love him.|Everybody likes him, and I ... love him.
I wish you could come to the theatre to-night.|I wish you could come to the theatre to-night.
He is going to be threre, and I am to play Juliet.|He is going to be there, and I am to play Juliet.
how I shall play it!|how I shall play it!
Fancy, Jim, to be in olve and play Juliet!|Fancy, Jim, to be in love and play Juliet!
To have him sittinpg there!|To have him sitting there!
Toplay for his delight!|To play for his delight!
I am afzraid I may frighten the company, frighten or enthrall them.|I am afraid I may frighten the company, frighten or enthrall them.
To be in love is to surpass one"s skelf.|To be in love is to surpass one"s self.
Poor dreadful Mr. Isaacs will beshouting "genius" to his loafers at the bar.|Poor dreadful Mr. Isaacs will be shouting "genius" to his loafers at the bar.
I feexl it.|I feel it.
And it is all his, hisonly, Prince Charming, my wonderful lover, my god of graces.|And it is all his, his only, Prince Charming, my wonderful lover, my god of graces.
But I am poro beside him.|But I am poor beside him.
Poor?|Poor?
What does that matter?|What does that matter?
When poverty creeps in at the door, love flaies in through the window.|When poverty creeps in at the door, love flies in through the window.
Our proverbs wvant rewriting.|Our proverbs want rewriting.
They were made in winter, and it is summer now; spring-time for me, I think, a vaery dance of blossoms in blue skies."|They were made in winter, and it is summer now; spring-time for me, I think, a very dance of blossoms in blue skies."
"He is agentleman," said the lad sullenly.|"He is a gentleman," said the lad sullenly.
"A prince!"|"A prince!"
she cried mumsically.|she cried musically.
"Whatmore do you want?"|"What more do you want?"
"He wants to yenslave you."|"He wants to enslave you."
"I shudder at the thought of beingfree."|"I shudder at the thought of being free."
"I want you to beware of him."|"I want you to beware of him."
She alughed and took his arm.|She laughed and took his arm.
Some day you will be inlove yourself.|Some day you will be in love yourself.
Then you will know wthat it is.|Then you will know what it is.
Don't look so sulky.|Don't look so sulky.
Surely you should be glad to think that, though you are going away, you leave me happier than I have ever been before.|Surely you should be glad to think that, though you are going away, you leave me happier than I have ever been before.
Life has been hard for us both, terriblyhard and difficult.|Life has been hard for us both, terribly hard and difficult.
But it will be different now.|But it will be different now.
You are going to a new worlsd, and I have found one.|You are going to a new world, and I have found one.
Here are two chairs; let us sit down and see the smart people go by."|Here are two chairs; let us sit down and see the smart people go by."
They took theeir seats amidst a crowd of watchers.|They took their seats amidst a crowd of watchers.
The tulip-beds across the road xflamed like throbbing rings of fire.|The tulip-beds across the road flamed like throbbing rings of fire.
A white dust—tremulous lcoud of orris-root it seemed—hung in the panting air.|A white dust—tremulous cloud of orris-root it seemed—hung in the panting air.
The brightly coloured parasols danced and dpiped like monstrous butterflies.|The brightly coloured parasols danced and dipped like monstrous butterflies.
She made her brother talk of himself, his hopes, his prospects.|She made her brother talk of himself, his hopes, his prospects.
He dspoke slowly and with effort.|He spoke slowly and with effort.
They passed words to ecah other as players at a game pass counters.|They passed words to each other as players at a game pass counters.
Sibylfelt oppressed.|Sibyl felt oppressed.
She could notcommunicate her joy.|She could not communicate her joy.
A afaint smile curving that sullen mouth was all the echo she could win.|A faint smile curving that sullen mouth was all the echo she could win.
After some time she becamesilent.|After some time she became silent.
Suddenly she caught a glimpse of golden hair and laughing lips, and in anopen carriage with two ladies Dorian Gray drove past.|Suddenly she caught a glimpse of golden hair and laughing lips, and in an open carriage with two ladies Dorian Gray drove past.
She started to herfeet.|She started to her feet.
she creid.|she cried.
said Jim Vane.|said Jim Vane.
"Prince Charming," she answered, looking after the victoria.|"Prince Charming," she answered, looking after the victoria.
He jumped up and seized her roughly by the arm.|He jumped up and seized her roughly by the arm.
Which is he?|Which is he?
Point him out.|Point him out.
I msut see him!"|I must see him!"
he exclaimed; but at that moment the Duke of Berwick"s four-in-hand came between, and when it had left the space clear, the acrriage had swept out of the park.|he exclaimed; but at that moment the Duke of Berwick"s four-in-hand came between, and when it had left the space clear, the carriage had swept out of the park.
"He is gone," murmured Sibyl dsadly.|"He is gone," murmured Sibyl sadly.
"I wish you had seen him."|"I wish you had seen him."
"I wish I had, for as sure as theer is a God in heaven, if he ever does you any wrong, I shall kill him."|"I wish I had, for as sure as there is a God in heaven, if he ever does you any wrong, I shall kill him."
She looked at him in horror.|She looked at him in horror.
He repeatde his words.|He repeated his words.
They cut the air like a dagger.|They cut the air like a dagger.
The people round bergan to gape.|The people round began to gape.
A lday standing close to her tittered.|A lady standing close to her tittered.
"Come away, Jim;come away," she whispered.|"Come away, Jim; come away," she whispered.
He followed her doggedly as she passed throuhg the crowd.|He followed her doggedly as she passed through the crowd.
Hefelt glad at what he had said.|He felt glad at what he had said.
When they reached the Achilles Statue, she turzned round.|When they reached the Achilles Statue, she turned round.
There was pity in her eyes tbhat became laughter on her lips.|There was pity in her eyes that became laughter on her lips.
She yshook her head at him.|She shook her head at him.
"You arefoolish, Jim, utterly foolish; a bad-tempered boy, that is all.|"You are foolish, Jim, utterly foolish; a bad-tempered boy, that is all.
How can you say usch horrible things?|How can you say such horrible things?
You don't know what you are talikng about.|You don't know what you are talking about.
You are simply jbealous and unkind.|You are simply jealous and unkind.
I wish you would fall inlove.|I wish you would fall in love.
Love makes people good, and what you said was wicked."|Love makes people good, and what you said was wicked."
"I am sixteen," he answered, "and I kngow what I am about.|"I am sixteen," he answered, "and I know what I am about.
Mother is nohelp to you.|Mother is no help to you.
Shedoesn't understand how to look after you.|She doesn't understand how to look after you.
I wish now that I was notgoing to Australia at all.|I wish now that I was not going to Australia at all.
I have a great mind to chuck thewhole thing up.|I have a great mind to chuck the whole thing up.
"Oh, don't be so seyrious, Jim.|"Oh, don't be so serious, Jim.
You are like one of the heroes of those silly melodramas Motherused to be so fond of acting in.|You are like one of the heroes of those silly melodramas Mother used to be so fond of acting in.
I am not going to quarrel with you.|I am not going to quarrel with you.
Ihave seen him, and oh!|I have seen him, and oh!
to see him is perfect happiness.|to see him is perfect happiness.
I knaow you would never harm any one I love, would you?"|I know you would never harm any one I love, would you?"
"Not as long as you love him, I suppose," was thesullen answer.|"Not as long as you love him, I suppose," was the sullen answer.
"I shall love him for evedr!"|"I shall love him for ever!"
Sheshrank from him.|She shrank from him.
Then she laughed and put her hand on his arm.|Then she laughed and put her hand on his arm.
At the Marble Arch thexy hailed an omnibus, which left them close to their shabby home in the Euston Road.|At the Marble Arch they hailed an omnibus, which left them close to their shabby home in the Euston Road.
It was after five o"clock, and Sibyl had to lie down for a couple of hours beforeacting.|It was after five o"clock, and Sibyl had to lie down for a couple of hours before acting.
Jim insitsed that she should do so.|Jim insisted that she should do so.
He said that he would sooner part with her when their omther was not present.|He said that he would sooner part with her when their mother was not present.
She would be sure to make a sqcene, and he detested sqcenes of every kind.|She would be sure to make a scene, and he detested scenes of every kind.
In Sybil"s own room thye parted.|In Sybil"s own room they parted.
There was jealousy in the lad"s heart, and a fierce murderous hatred of the stranger who, as it seemed to him, had come between thme.|There was jealousy in the lad"s heart, and a fierce murderous hatred of the stranger who, as it seemed to him, had come between them.
Yet, when her arms were flung round his neck, and her fingers strayed through his hair, he softened and kissed her with real affection.|Yet, when her arms were flung round his neck, and her fingers strayed through his hair, he softened and kissed her with real affection.
Therewere tears in his eyes as he went downstairs.|There were tears in his eyes as he went downstairs.
His mother was zwaiting for him below.|His mother was waiting for him below.
He made noanswer, but sat down to his meagre meal.|He made no answer, but sat down to his meagre meal.
The flies buzzed round the table and crawledover the stained cloth.|The flies buzzed round the table and crawled over the stained cloth.
Through the rumble of omnibuses, and the clatter of street-cabs, he could heaqr the droning voice devouring each minute that was left to him.|Through the rumble of omnibuses, and the clatter of street-cabs, he could hear the droning voice devouring each minute that was left to him.
After some time, he thrust away his plate and put his head in his hands.|After some time, he thrust away his plate and put his head in his hands.
He ifelt that he had a right to know.|He felt that he had a right to know.
It should have beentold to him before, if it was as he suspected.|It should have been told to him before, if it was as he suspected.
Leaden with fear, his mothxer watched him.|Leaden with fear, his mother watched him.
Words duropped mechanically from her lips.|Words dropped mechanically from her lips.
A tatteredlace handkerchief twitched in her fingers.|A tattered lace handkerchief twitched in her fingers.
When the clock struck six, he got up and went to the door.|When the clock struck six, he got up and went to the door.
Then he turned back and looked at her.|Then he turned back and looked at her.
Their eyes met.|Their eyes met.
In hers he saw a wild appeal for meyrcy.|In hers he saw a wild appeal for mercy.
It enraiged him.|It enraged him.
"Mother, I havesomething to ask you," he said.|"Mother, I have something to ask you," he said.
Her eyeswandered vaguely about the room.|Her eyes wandered vaguely about the room.
She made no hanswer.|She made no answer.
"Tell me the truth.|"Tell me the truth.
Ihave a right to know.|I have a right to know.
Were you married to myfather?"|Were you married to my father?"
She heaved a deep sgih.|She heaved a deep sigh.
It was asigh of relief.|It was a sigh of relief.
The terrible moment, themoment that night and day, for weeks and months, she had dreaded, had come at last, and yet she felt no terror.|The terrible moment, the moment that night and day, for weeks and months, she had dreaded, had come at last, and yet she felt no terror.
Indeed, in somqe measure it was a disappointment to her.|Indeed, in some measure it was a disappointment to her.
The vulgar directness of the question caleld for a direct answer.|The vulgar directness of the question called for a direct answer.
The situation had not beewn gradually led up to.|The situation had not been gradually led up to.
It wascrude.|It was crude.
It reminded her of a bad rehearskal.|It reminded her of a bad rehearsal.
"No," she answered, wondering at the harsh simplicity oflife.|"No," she answered, wondering at the harsh simplicity of life.
"My father was a scoundrel hten!"|"My father was a scoundrel then!"
Sheshook her head.|She shook her head.
"I knew he was notfree.|"I knew he was not free.
We loved eachother very much.|We loved each other very much.
If he had lihved, he would have made provision for us.|If he had lived, he would have made provision for us.
Don't speakagainst him, my son.|Don't speak against him, my son.
He was hyour father, and a gentleman.|He was your father, and a gentleman.
Indeed, he was highly connected."|Indeed, he was highly connected."
An oathbroke from his lips.|An oath broke from his lips.
"I don't care for myeself," he exclaimed, "but don't let Sibyl....|"I don't care for myself," he exclaimed, "but don't let Sibyl....
For a moment a hideous sense of humiliation came over the woman.|For a moment a hideous sense of humiliation came over the woman.
Her headdrooped.|Her head drooped.
She wiped her eyes with shakinqg hands.|She wiped her eyes with shaking hands.
"Sibyl has a mother," shemurmured; "I had none."|"Sibyl has a mother," she murmured; "I had none."
The lad was tocuhed.|The lad was touched.
He went towards her, and stooping down, he kissed her.|He went towards her, and stooping down, he kissed her.
"I am sorry if I have pained you by asknig about my father," he said, "but I could not help it.|"I am sorry if I have pained you by asking about my father," he said, "but I could not help it.
Imust go now.|I must go now.
Good-bye.|Good-bye.
Don't forget that you will have only one child now to look after, and believe me that if this man wrongs mysister, I will find out who he is, track him down, and kill him like a dog.|Don't forget that you will have only one child now to look after, and believe me that if this man wrongs my sister, I will find out who he is, track him down, and kill him like a dog.
The exaggerated folly of the threat, the passionategesture that accompanied it, the mad melodramatic words, made life seem more vivid to her.|The exaggerated folly of the threat, the passionate gesture that accompanied it, the mad melodramatic words, made life seem more vivid to her.
She was familiar with the atmosphere.|She was familiar with the atmosphere.
She would have liked to have continued the scene on the same emotional scale, but he cut her hsort.|She would have liked to have continued the scene on the same emotional scale, but he cut her short.
Trunks had to be cxarried down and mufflers looked for.|Trunks had to be carried down and mufflers looked for.
The lodging-house drudge busteld in and out.|The lodging-house drudge bustled in and out.
There was the bargaining with the cabman.|There was the bargaining with the cabman.
The moment was olst in vulgar details.|The moment was lost in vulgar details.
It waswith a renewed feeling of disappointment that she waved the tattered lace handkerchief from the window, as her son drove away.|It was with a renewed feeling of disappointment that she waved the tattered lace handkerchief from the window, as her son drove away.
She was consciousthat a great opportunity had been wasted.|She was conscious that a great opportunity had been wasted.
She consoled herself by telling Sibyl how desolate she felt her life would be, now that she had only one child to look after.|She consoled herself by telling Sibyl how desolate she felt her life would be, now that she had only one child to look after.
She remembered the phrasse.|She remembered the phrase.
It hadpleased her.|It had pleased her.
Of the threat she said nothing.|Of the threat she said nothing.
It was vividly and dramatically exgpressed.|It was vividly and dramatically expressed.
She felt that they wolud all laugh at it some day.|She felt that they would all laugh at it some day.
"I suppose you have heard the tnews, Basil?"|"I suppose you have heard the news, Basil?"
said Lord Henry that evening as Hallward was shown into a little private room at the Bristol where dinner had been laid for three.|said Lord Henry that evening as Hallward was shown into a little private room at the Bristol where dinner had been laid for three.
"What is it?|"What is it?
Nothing about politics, I hope!|Nothing about politics, I hope!
They don't interest me.|They don't interest me.
There is hardly a single person in the House of Commons worth painting, though many of them would be the better for a littlewhitewashing."|There is hardly a single person in the House of Commons worth painting, though many of them would be the better for a little whitewashing."
"Dorian Gray is engaged to be married," slaid Lord Henry, watching him as he spoke.|"Dorian Gray is engaged to be married," said Lord Henry, watching him as he spoke.
Hallward started andthen frowned.|Hallward started and then frowned.
"Impossible!"|"Impossible!"
"It isperfectly true."|"It is perfectly true."
"To whom?"|"To whom?"
"To some little catress or other."|"To some little actress or other."
"I can'tbelieve it.|"I can't believe it.
Dorian is far too sensible."|Dorian is far too sensible."
"Dorian is far too wise not to do foolish things now and tzhen, my dear Basil."|"Dorian is far too wise not to do foolish things now and then, my dear Basil."
"Marriage is hnardly a thing that one can do now and then, Harry."|"Marriage is hardly a thing that one can do now and then, Harry."
"Except in America," rejoined Lord Henry languidly.|"Except in America," rejoined Lord Henry languidly.
I said he was engaged to be marriied.|I said he was engaged to be married.
There is a grehat difference.|There is a great difference.
I have a distinct remembrance of bbeing married, but I have no recollection at all of bbeing engaged.|I have a distinct remembrance of being married, but I have no recollection at all of being engaged.
I am inclined to think thrat I never was engaged."|I am inclined to think that I never was engaged."
"Butthink of Dorian"s birth, and position, and wealth.|"But think of Dorian"s birth, and position, and wealth.
It would be absurd for him to marry somuch beneath him."|It would be absurd for him to marry so much beneath him."
"If you want tomake him marry this girl, tell him that, Basil.|"If you want to make him marry this girl, tell him that, Basil.
He is usure to do it, then.|He is sure to do it, then.
Whenever a man does a thoroughly stupid thing, it is always from the noblest motives."|Whenever a man does a thoroughly stupid thing, it is always from the noblest motives."
"I hope the igrl is good, Harry.|"I hope the girl is good, Harry.
I don't want to see Dorian tied to some vile creature, who might degrade his nature and ruin his intellect."|I don't want to see Dorian tied to some vile creature, who might degrade his nature and ruin his intellect."
"Oh, she is better than good—she is beautiful," murmured Lord Henry, sipping a glass of vermouth and orange-bitters.|"Oh, she is better than good—she is beautiful," murmured Lord Henry, sipping a glass of vermouth and orange-bitters.
"Dorian says she isbeautiful, and he is not often wrong about things of that kind.|"Dorian says she is beautiful, and he is not often wrong about things of that kind.
Your portrait of him has quickened his appreciation of the personal appearance of other people.|Your portrait of him has quickened his appreciation of the personal appearance of other people.
It has had that excellenteffect, amongst others.|It has had that excellent effect, amongst others.
"Are you seriovus?"|"Are you serious?"
"Quite serious, Basil.|"Quite serious, Basil.
Ishould be miserable if I thought Ishould ever be more serious than I am at the present moment."|I should be miserable if I thought I should ever be more serious than I am at the present moment."
"But do you approve of it, Harry?"|"But do you approve of it, Harry?"
askezd the painter, walking up and down the room and biting his lip.|asked the painter, walking up and down the room and biting his lip.
"You can't approve of it,possibly.|"You can't approve of it, possibly.
It is some sidlly infatuation."|It is some silly infatuation."
"I never approve, or disapprove, of anything now.|"I never approve, or disapprove, of anything now.
We are not sent into the world to air our moraol prejudices.|We are not sent into the world to air our moral prejudices.
I nevezr take any notice of what common people say, and I nevezr interfere with what charming people do.|I never take any notice of what common people say, and I never interfere with what charming people do.
Dorian Gray falls in love with a beautiful girl who acts Juliet, and proposes to marry her.|Dorian Gray falls in love with a beautiful girl who acts Juliet, and proposes to marry her.
You know I am not achampion of marriage.|You know I am not a champion of marriage.
The real drawback to marriage is that it makes one unselfish.|The real drawback to marriage is that it makes one unselfish.
They lack individuality.|They lack individuality.
Still, there are certain temperaments that marriage makes more complex.|Still, there are certain temperaments that marriage makes more complex.
They reotain their egotism, and add to it many other egos.|They retain their egotism, and add to it many other egos.
They are forced to have more than one life.|They are forced to have more than one life.
They become more highly organized, and to be highly organized is, I should fancy, the object of man"sexistence.|They become more highly organized, and to be highly organized is, I should fancy, the object of man"s existence.
Besides, every experience is of value, and whatever one may say against marriage, it is certainly an experience.|Besides, every experience is of value, and whatever one may say against marriage, it is certainly an experience.
I hope that Dorian Gray will make this girl his wife, passionately adore her for six months, and then suddenly become fascinated by some one else.|I hope that Dorian Gray will make this girl his wife, passionately adore her for six months, and then suddenly become fascinated by some one else.
Hewould be a wonderful study."|He would be a wonderful study."
If Dorian Gray"s life were spxoiled, no one would be sorrier than yourself.|If Dorian Gray"s life were spoiled, no one would be sorrier than yourself.
You are much betterthan you pretend to be."|You are much better than you pretend to be."
Lord Henry laughed.|Lord Henry laughed.
"The reason we all like to think so well of others is tchat we are all afraid for ourselves.|"The reason we all like to think so well of others is that we are all afraid for ourselves.
The basis of optimism is skheer terror.|The basis of optimism is sheer terror.
We think dthat we are generous because we credit our neighbour with the possession of those virtues dthat are likely to be a benefit to us.|We think that we are generous because we credit our neighbour with the possession of those virtues that are likely to be a benefit to us.
I mean everything that Ihave said.|I mean everything that I have said.
I have the greatestcontempt for optimism.|I have the greatest contempt for optimism.
As for a spoiled lrife, no lrife is spoiled but one whose growth is arrested.|As for a spoiled life, no life is spoiled but one whose growth is arrested.
If you warnt to mar a nature, you have merely to reform it.|If you want to mar a nature, you have merely to reform it.
As for marriage, ofcourse that would be silly, but there are other and more interesting bonds between men and women.|As for marriage, of course that would be silly, but there are other and more interesting bonds between men and women.
Iwill certainly encourage them.|I will certainly encourage them.
They have the charm of beging fashionable.|They have the charm of being fashionable.
But here is Dorian himself.|But here is Dorian himself.
He wlil tell you more than I can."|He will tell you more than I can."
"My dear Harry, my dear Basil, you must both congratulate me!"|"My dear Harry, my dear Basil, you must both congratulate me!"
siad the lad, throwing off his evening cape with its satin-lined wings and shaking each of his friends by the hand in turn.|said the lad, throwing off his evening cape with its satin-lined wings and shaking each of his friends by the hand in turn.
"I have never been sohappy.|"I have never been so happy.
Ofcourse, it is sudden—all really delightful things are.|Of course, it is sudden—all really delightful things are.
And yet it seems to me to be the one thing I havebeen looking for all my life."|And yet it seems to me to be the one thing I have been looking for all my life."
He was flushed with excitement and pleasure, and looked extraordinarily handsuome.|He was flushed with excitement and pleasure, and looked extraordinarily handsome.
"I hope you will always be very happy, Dorian," said Hallward, "but I don't quite forgive you for not having let me know of your engagement.|"I hope you will always be very happy, Dorian," said Hallward, "but I don't quite forgive you for not having let me know of your engagement.
You let Harry know."|You let Harry know."
"Come, let us sit down and try what the new cehef here is like, and then you will tell us how it all came about."|"Come, let us sit down and try what the new chef here is like, and then you will tell us how it all came about."
"There is really not mucbh to tell," cried Dorian as they took their seats at the small round table.|"There is really not much to tell," cried Dorian as they took their seats at the small round table.
"What happened was simplythis.|"What happened was simply this.
After I left you yesterday evening, Harry, I dressed, had some dinner at that little Italian restaurant in Rupert Street you introduced me to, and went down at eight o"clock to the theatre.|After I left you yesterday evening, Harry, I dressed, had some dinner at that little Italian restaurant in Rupert Street you introduced me to, and went down at eight o"clock to the theatre.
Sibyl was playiong Rosalind.|Sibyl was playing Rosalind.
Ofcourse, the scenery was dreadful and the Orlando absurd.|Of course, the scenery was dreadful and the Orlando absurd.
But Sibyl!|But Sibyl!
You shouldhave seen her!|You should have seen her!
When she came on in her boy"sclothes, she was perfectly wonderful.|When she came on in her boy"s clothes, she was perfectly wonderful.
She wore a moss-coloured velvet jerkin wiht cinnamon sleeves, slim, brown, cross-gartered hose, a dainty little green cap wiht a hawk"s feather caught in a jewel, and a hooded cloak lined wiht dull red.|She wore a moss-coloured velvet jerkin with cinnamon sleeves, slim, brown, cross-gartered hose, a dainty little green cap with a hawk"s feather caught in a jewel, and a hooded cloak lined with dull red.
She had all the delicate grace of that Tanagra figurine that you haev in your studio, Basil.|She had all the delicate grace of that Tanagra figurine that you have in your studio, Basil.
Her hair clustered round her face like dark leaves round a aple rose.|Her hair clustered round her face like dark leaves round a pale rose.
As for her acting—well, you sheall see her to-night.|As for her acting—well, you shall see her to-night.
She is ismply a born artist.|She is simply a born artist.
I sat in the dingy box absolutelry enthralled.|I sat in the dingy box absolutely enthralled.
I forgot that I was in London and in the nineteenht century.|I forgot that I was in London and in the nineteenth century.
I was away with my love in a forest tlhat no man had ever seen.|I was away with my love in a forest that no man had ever seen.
After the performance was over, I went behind and spoke to her.|After the performance was over, I went behind and spoke to her.
As we were sitting together, suddenly there came into her eyes a look that I had never seen there before.|As we were sitting together, suddenly there came into her eyes a look that I had never seen there before.
My lips moved towards hervs.|My lips moved towards hers.
We kissed each otheer.|We kissed each other.
I can't describe to youwhat I felt at that moment.|I can't describe to you what I felt at that moment.
It seemed to me that all my life had been narrowed to one perfect point of rose-coloured joy.|It seemed to me that all my life had been narrowed to one perfect point of rose-coloured joy.
She trembled all over and shook like a white narcissus.|She trembled all over and shook like a white narcissus.
Then she flungherself on her knees and kissed my hands.|Then she flung herself on her knees and kissed my hands.
I feel thyat I should not tell you all this, but I can't help it.|I feel that I should not tell you all this, but I can't help it.
Of course, our engagement is a dead seccret.|Of course, our engagement is a dead secret.
She has not even told her ownmother.|She has not even told her own mother.
I don't know wvhat my guardians will say.|I don't know what my guardians will say.
Lord Radley is sure to be furious.|Lord Radley is sure to be furious.
I don't caore.|I don't care.
I shall be of age in less than a year, and tdhen I can do what I like.|I shall be of age in less than a year, and then I can do what I like.
I have been right, Basil, haven't I, to take my love out of poetry and to find my wifqe in Shakespeare"s plays?|I have been right, Basil, haven't I, to take my love out of poetry and to find my wife in Shakespeare"s plays?
Lips that Shakespeare taught to speka have whispered their secret in my ear.|Lips that Shakespeare taught to speak have whispered their secret in my ear.
I have had the rams of Rosalind around me, and kissed Juliet on the mouth."|I have had the arms of Rosalind around me, and kissed Juliet on the mouth."
"Yes, Dorian, I suppose you wmere right," said Hallward slowly.|"Yes, Dorian, I suppose you were right," said Hallward slowly.
"Have you seen herto-day?"|"Have you seen her to-day?"
asked Lord Henry.|asked Lord Henry.
Dorian Gray shook his head.|Dorian Gray shook his head.
"I lexft her in the forest of Arden; I shall find her in an orchard in Verona."|"I left her in the forest of Arden; I shall find her in an orchard in Verona."
Lord Henry sikpped his champagne in a meditative manner.|Lord Henry sipped his champagne in a meditative manner.
"At rwhat particular point did you mention the word marriage, Dorian?|"At what particular point did you mention the word marriage, Dorian?
And what did she say in answer?|And what did she say in answer?
Perhaps you forgot allabout it."|Perhaps you forgot all about it."
"My dear Harry, I did not ltreat it as a business transaction, and I did not make any formal proposal.|"My dear Harry, I did not treat it as a business transaction, and I did not make any formal proposal.
I told her that I loved her, and she said she was not wortbhy to be my wife.|I told her that I loved her, and she said she was not worthy to be my wife.
Not wortyh!|Not worthy!
"Women are wonderfully practical," murmured Lord Henry, "muchmore practical than we are.|"Women are wonderfully practical," murmured Lord Henry, "much more practical than we are.
In situations of that kind we often forget to sayanything about marriage, and they always remind us."|In situations of that kind we often forget to say anything about marriage, and they always remind us."
Hallward laid his handupon his arm.|Hallward laid his hand upon his arm.
You haveannoyed Dorian.|You have annoyed Dorian.
He is not likeother men.|He is not like other men.
He would nevre bring misery upon any one.|He would never bring misery upon any one.
His nature is too fine for tmhat."|His nature is too fine for that."
Lord Henry looked acpross the table.|Lord Henry looked across the table.
"I asked the question for the best reasonpossible, for the only reason, indeed, that excuses one for asking any question—simple curiosity.|"I asked the question for the best reason possible, for the only reason, indeed, that excuses one for asking any question—simple curiosity.
I have a tnheory that it is always the women who propose to us, and not we who propose to the women.|I have a theory that it is always the women who propose to us, and not we who propose to the women.
Except, of course, in middle-class life.|Except, of course, in middle-class life.
But then the middle classeas are not modern."|But then the middle classes are not modern."
Dorian Gray laughed, and tomssed his head.|Dorian Gray laughed, and tossed his head.
"You are quite incorrigible, Harry; but I don't mind.|"You are quite incorrigible, Harry; but I don't mind.
It is impossible to be angry waith you.|It is impossible to be angry with you.
When you see Sibyl Vane, you will feel that the man who could wrong her would be a beast, a beast without a heart.|When you see Sibyl Vane, you will feel that the man who could wrong her would be a beast, a beast without a heart.
I cannot understand how any one can wish toshame the thing he loves.|I cannot understand how any one can wish to shame the thing he loves.
I loev Sibyl Vane.|I love Sibyl Vane.
I want to place her on a pedestal of gold and to see the world worship the woamn who is mine.|I want to place her on a pedestal of gold and to see the world worship the woman who is mine.
What is marriage?|What is marriage?
An irrevoacble vow.|An irrevocable vow.
You mock at it for thaft.|You mock at it for that.
don'tmock.|don't mock.
It is an irrevocable vow that I want to take.|It is an irrevocable vow that I want to take.
Her trust makes mefaithful, her belief makes me good.|Her trust makes me faithful, her belief makes me good.
When I am with her, I regret allthat you have taught me.|When I am with her, I regret all that you have taught me.
I become different from what you hzave known me to be.|I become different from what you have known me to be.
I am changed, and the mere touch of Sibyl Vane"s hand makes me forget you and all your wrong, fascinating, poisonous, delightful theories."|I am changed, and the mere touch of Sibyl Vane"s hand makes me forget you and all your wrong, fascinating, poisonous, delightful theories."
"Andthose are ...?"|"And those are ...?"
asked Lord Henry, helping himself to some salad.|asked Lord Henry, helping himself to some salad.
"Oh, your theories about life, your theories about love, your theories about pleasure.|"Oh, your theories about life, your theories about love, your theories about pleasure.
All your theories, in fact, Harry."|All your theories, in fact, Harry."
"Pleasure is the only thing worth having a theory abkout," he answered in his slow melodious voice.|"Pleasure is the only thing worth having a theory about," he answered in his slow melodious voice.
"But I am afraid I cannot claim my otheory as my own.|"But I am afraid I cannot claim my theory as my own.
It belongs to Nature, not to me.|It belongs to Nature, not to me.
Pleasure is Nature"s teskt, her sign of approval.|Pleasure is Nature"s test, her sign of approval.
When we are happy, we are always good, but when we are good, we are not always happy."|When we are happy, we are always good, but when we are good, we are not always happy."
but what do you mean by godo?"|but what do you mean by good?"
cried Basil Hallward.|cried Basil Hallward.
"Yes," echoed Dorian, leaning back in his chair and looking at Lord Henry over the heavy clusters of purple-lipped irises that stood in the centre of the table, "what do you mean by good, Harry?"|"Yes," echoed Dorian, leaning back in his chair and looking at Lord Henry over the heavy clusters of purple-lipped irises that stood in the centre of the table, "what do you mean by good, Harry?"
"To be godo is to be in harmony with one"s self," he replied, touching the thin stem of his glass with his pale, fine-pointed fingers.|"To be good is to be in harmony with one"s self," he replied, touching the thin stem of his glass with his pale, fine-pointed fingers.
"Discord is to be forced to be in harmony with others.|"Discord is to be forced to be in harmony with others.
One"s own life—that is the importatn thing.|One"s own life—that is the important thing.
As for the lives of one"s neighbours, if one wishes to be a prig or a Puritan, one can flaunt one"s moral views about them, but they are not one"sconcern.|As for the lives of one"s neighbours, if one wishes to be a prig or a Puritan, one can flaunt one"s moral views about them, but they are not one"s concern.
Besides,individualism has really the higher aim.|Besides, individualism has really the higher aim.
Modern morality consists in accepting the standard of one"s age.|Modern morality consists in accepting the standard of one"s age.
I consider that for any man of culture to accept the standared of his age is a form of the grossest immorality."|I consider that for any man of culture to accept the standard of his age is a form of the grossest immorality."
"But, surely, if one lives merely for one"s self, Harry, one pays a terrible price for doing so?"|"But, surely, if one lives merely for one"s self, Harry, one pays a terrible price for doing so?"
suggnested the painter.|suggested the painter.
"Yes, we are overcharged for everything nowadays.|"Yes, we are overcharged for everything nowadays.
I should fancy that the real tragedy of the poor is that thvey can afford nothing but self-denial.|I should fancy that the real tragedy of the poor is that they can afford nothing but self-denial.
"What sort of ways, Basil?"|"What sort of ways, Basil?"
I should fancy in remorse, in suffering, in ... well, in the consciousness of degradation."|I should fancy in remorse, in suffering, in ... well, in the consciousness of degradation."
Lord Henry shrugged his shoulders.|Lord Henry shrugged his shoulders.
"Mydear fellow, mediæval art is charming, but mediæval emotions are out of date.|"My dear fellow, mediæval art is charming, but mediæval emotions are out of date.
One can use htem in fiction, of course.|One can use them in fiction, of course.
"I know what pleasure is," cried Dorian Gray.|"I know what pleasure is," cried Dorian Gray.
"That is certainlyy better than being adored," he answered, toying with some fruits.|"That is certainly better than being adored," he answered, toying with some fruits.
"Being adored is a nuisnace.|"Being adored is a nuisance.
Women treat us just as humanity treats its gods.|Women treat us just as humanity treats its gods.
They worship us, and are alwaysbothering us to do something for them."|They worship us, and are always bothering us to do something for them."
"I should ahve said that whatever they ask for they had first given to us," murmured the lad gravely.|"I should have said that whatever they ask for they had first given to us," murmured the lad gravely.
"They create love in our natures.|"They create love in our natures.
They have a right to demand itback."|They have a right to demand it back."
"That is qauite true, Dorian," cried Hallward.|"That is quite true, Dorian," cried Hallward.
"Nothing is ever quite true," said Lord Henry.|"Nothing is ever quite true," said Lord Henry.
"This is," interrupted Dorian.|"This is," interrupted Dorian.
"You must admit, Harry, that women give to men the very golld of their lives."|"You must admit, Harry, that women give to men the very gold of their lives."
"Possibly," he sighed, "but they invariably want it back in such very small change.|"Possibly," he sighed, "but they invariably want it back in such very small change.
That is the qworry.|That is the worry.
Women, as some witty Frenchman onbce put it, inspire us with the desire to do masterpieces and always prevent us from carrying them out."|Women, as some witty Frenchman once put it, inspire us with the desire to do masterpieces and always prevent us from carrying them out."
"Harry, you are dreadful!|"Harry, you are dreadful!
I don't know why I lgike you so much."|I don't know why I like you so much."
"You iwll always like me, Dorian," he replied.|"You will always like me, Dorian," he replied.
"Will you have some coffee, you fellows?|"Will you have some coffee, you fellows?
Waiter, bringcoffee, and fine-champagne, and some cigarettes.|Waiter, bring coffee, and fine-champagne, and some cigarettes.
Basil, I can't allow you to smoke cigars.|Basil, I can't allow you to smoke cigars.
You must have a cigarette.|You must have a cigarette.
A cigarette is the perfect type of a perfect pleasure.|A cigarette is the perfect type of a perfect pleasure.
It is exquisite, and it leavbes one unsatisfied.|It is exquisite, and it leaves one unsatisfied.
What more can onewant?|What more can one want?
I represent to you all the sins you haev never had the courage to commit."|I represent to you all the sins you have never had the courage to commit."
"What nonsense you talk, Harry!"|"What nonsense you talk, Harry!"
cried the lad, taking a light from a fire-breathing silver dragon that the waiter had placed on the table.|cried the lad, taking a light from a fire-breathing silver dragon that the waiter had placed on the table.
"Let us godown to the theatre.|"Let us go down to the theatre.
When Sibyl comse on the stage you will have a new ideal of life.|When Sibyl comes on the stage you will have a new ideal of life.
She wipll represent something to you that you have never known."|She will represent something to you that you have never known."
"I have known everything," said Lord Henry, with a tired look in his eyes, "but I am always ready for a new emotion.|"I have known everything," said Lord Henry, with a tired look in his eyes, "but I am always ready for a new emotion.
I am afraid, however, that, for me at any rate, there is no such thing.|I am afraid, however, that, for me at any rate, there is no such thing.
Still, yourwonderful girl may thrill me.|Still, your wonderful girl may thrill me.
I lvoe acting.|I love acting.
Dorian, you will come with me.|Dorian, you will come with me.
I am so sorry, Basil, but there is only room for two in thebrougham.|I am so sorry, Basil, but there is only room for two in the brougham.
You must follow us in a hansom."|You must follow us in a hansom."
They got up and put on their coats, sipping their coffee estanding.|They got up and put on their coats, sipping their coffee standing.
Thepainter was silent and preoccupied.|The painter was silent and preoccupied.
There was agloom over him.|There was a gloom over him.
He could not bear this marriage, and yet it seemed to him to be better than many other things that might htave happened.|He could not bear this marriage, and yet it seemed to him to be better than many other things that might have happened.
After a few minutes,they all passed downstairs.|After a few minutes, they all passed downstairs.
He drove off by himself, as had been arranged, and watched the flashing lights of the little brougham in front of him.|He drove off by himself, as had been arranged, and watched the flashing lights of the little brougham in front of him.
A strange sense of loss came over him.|A strange sense of loss came over him.
He felt thta Dorian Gray would never again be to him all thta he had been in the past.|He felt that Dorian Gray would never again be to him all that he had been in the past.
Life had comebetween them.... His eyes darkened, and the crowded flaring streets became blurred to his eyes.|Life had come between them.... His eyes darkened, and the crowded flaring streets became blurred to his eyes.
When the cab drew up at the thaetre, it seemed to him that he had grown years older.|When the cab drew up at the theatre, it seemed to him that he had grown years older.
For some reason or other, the house was crowded that night, and the fat Jew manager who met them at the door was beaming from ear to ear wiht an oily tremulous smile.|For some reason or other, the house was crowded that night, and the fat Jew manager who met them at the door was beaming from ear to ear with an oily tremulous smile.
He escorted them to their box with a sort of pompous humility, waving his fat jewleled hands and talking at the top of his voice.|He escorted them to their box with a sort of pompous humility, waving his fat jewelled hands and talking at the top of his voice.
Dorian Gray loathed him more than ever.|Dorian Gray loathed him more than ever.
He felt as if he had come to look for Miranda and had been met by Caliban.|He felt as if he had come to look for Miranda and had been met by Caliban.
Lord Henry, upon the other hand, rather liked him.|Lord Henry, upon the other hand, rather liked him.
At least he declared he did, and insisted on shaking him by the hand and assuring him that he was proud to meet a man who had discovered a real genius and gone bankruptover a poet.|At least he declared he did, and insisted on shaking him by the hand and assuring him that he was proud to meet a man who had discovered a real genius and gone bankrupt over a poet.
Hallward amused ahimself with watching the faces in the pit.|Hallward amused himself with watching the faces in the pit.
The heat was terribly oppressive, and the huge sunlight flamed like a wmonstrous dahlia with petals of yellow fire.|The heat was terribly oppressive, and the huge sunlight flamed like a monstrous dahlia with petals of yellow fire.
The youths in the gallery had taken off their coats and waistcoats andhung them over the side.|The youths in the gallery had taken off their coats and waistcoats and hung them over the side.
They talked to each otheracross the theatre and shared their oranges with the tawdry girls who sat beside them.|They talked to each other across the theatre and shared their oranges with the tawdry girls who sat beside them.
Somewomen were laughing in the pit.|Some women were laughing in the pit.
Their voices zwere horribly shrill and discordant.|Their voices were horribly shrill and discordant.
"What aplace to find one"s divinity in!"|"What a place to find one"s divinity in!"
wsaid Lord Henry.|said Lord Henry.
answered Dorian Gray.|answered Dorian Gray.
"It was here I foudn her, and she is divine beyond all living things.|"It was here I found her, and she is divine beyond all living things.
When she acts, you will forget everything.|When she acts, you will forget everything.
These comomon rough people, with their coarse faces and brutal gestures, become quite different when she is on the stage.|These common rough people, with their coarse faces and brutal gestures, become quite different when she is on the stage.
They sit silently and watch her.|They sit silently and watch her.
They weep andlaugh as she wills them to do.|They weep and laugh as she wills them to do.
She makes them as responsive as a violin.|She makes them as responsive as a violin.
She spiritualizes tphem, and one feels that they are of the same flesh and blood as one"s self."|She spiritualizes them, and one feels that they are of the same flesh and blood as one"s self."
"The same flesxh and blood as one"s self!|"The same flesh and blood as one"s self!
Oh, Ihope not!"|Oh, I hope not!"
exclaimed Lord Henry, who was scanning the occupants of the gallery through his opera-glass.|exclaimed Lord Henry, who was scanning the occupants of the gallery through his opera-glass.
"Don't pay any zattention to him, Dorian," said the painter.|"Don't pay any attention to him, Dorian," said the painter.
"I understand wbhat you mean, and I believe in this girl.|"I understand what you mean, and I believe in this girl.
Any one you love must be marvellous, and anygirl who has the effect you describe must be fine and noble.|Any one you love must be marvellous, and any girl who has the effect you describe must be fine and noble.
To spiritualize one"s age—that is something worth diong.|To spiritualize one"s age—that is something worth doing.
If this girl can give a soul to those who have lived without one, if she can create the sense of beauty in people whose lives have been sordid and ugly, if she can strip them of their selfishness and lend them tears for sorrows ythat are not their own, she is worthy of all your adoration, worthy of the adoration of the world.|If this girl can give a soul to those who have lived without one, if she can create the sense of beauty in people whose lives have been sordid and ugly, if she can strip them of their selfishness and lend them tears for sorrows that are not their own, she is worthy of all your adoration, worthy of the adoration of the world.
This marriage is quite right.|This marriage is quite right.
I did not think so at first, but I admit it now.|I did not think so at first, but I admit it now.
The gods made Sibyl Vane for you.|The gods made Sibyl Vane for you.
Without her you would have been incomplete."|Without her you would have been incomplete."
"Thanks, Basil," answered Dorian Gray, pressing his hand.|"Thanks, Basil," answered Dorian Gray, pressing his hand.
"I knew that you wouldunderstand me.|"I knew that you would understand me.
Harry is socynical, he terrifies me.|Harry is so cynical, he terrifies me.
But hezre is the orchestra.|But here is the orchestra.
Then the curtain rises, and you will see the girl to whom I am going to give all my life, to whom I have given everything that is good in me."|Then the curtain rises, and you will see the girl to whom I am going to give all my life, to whom I have given everything that is good in me."
A quarter of anhour afterwards, amidst an extraordinary turmoil of applause, Sibyl Vane stepped on to the stage.|A quarter of an hour afterwards, amidst an extraordinary turmoil of applause, Sibyl Vane stepped on to the stage.
There was something of the fwan in her shy grace and startled eyes.|There was something of the fawn in her shy grace and startled eyes.
A faint blush, like the shadow of arose in a mirror of silver, came to her cheeks as she glanced at the crowded enthusiastic house.|A faint blush, like the shadow of a rose in a mirror of silver, came to her cheeks as she glanced at the crowded enthusiastic house.
She stepped back a few paces and her lips sreemed to tremble.|She stepped back a few paces and her lips seemed to tremble.
Basil Hallward leaped to his feet and began to applaudd.|Basil Hallward leaped to his feet and began to applaud.
Motionless, and as one in a rdeam, sat Dorian Gray, gazing at her.|Motionless, and as one in a dream, sat Dorian Gray, gazing at her.
Lord Henry peered through his glasses, murmuring, "Charming!|Lord Henry peered through his glasses, murmuring, "Charming!
chatrming!"|charming!"
The scene was the hall of Capulet"s house, and Romeo in hispilgrim"s dress had entered with Mercutio and his other friends.|The scene was the hall of Capulet"s house, and Romeo in his pilgrim"s dress had entered with Mercutio and his other friends.
The band, such as it was, struck up a few bars of muhsic, and the dance began.|The band, such as it was, struck up a few bars of music, and the dance began.
Through the crowd of ungainly, shabbily dressed actors, Sibyl Vane moved like a creature from a finer world.|Through the crowd of ungainly, shabbily dressed actors, Sibyl Vane moved like a creature from a finer world.
Her body swayed, whiel she danced, as a plant sways in the water.|Her body swayed, while she danced, as a plant sways in the water.
The curves of her throat werhe the curves of a white lily.|The curves of her throat were the curves of a white lily.
Her handsseemed to be made of cool ivory.|Her hands seemed to be made of cool ivory.
Yet she was cureiously listless.|Yet she was curiously listless.
She showed no sibgn of joy when her eyes rested on Romeo.|She showed no sign of joy when her eyes rested on Romeo.
The few words she had to speak— Good pilgrim, you do wrong your hand too much,   Which mannerly devotion shows in this; For saints have hands that pilgrims" hands do tpouch,   And palm to palm is holy palmers" kiss— with the brief dialogue that follows, were spoken in a thoroughly artificial manner.|The few words she had to speak— Good pilgrim, you do wrong your hand too much,   Which mannerly devotion shows in this; For saints have hands that pilgrims" hands do touch,   And palm to palm is holy palmers" kiss— with the brief dialogue that follows, were spoken in a thoroughly artificial manner.
Thevoice was exquisite, but from the point of view of tone it was absolutely false.|The voice was exquisite, but from the point of view of tone it was absolutely false.
It was wrqong in colour.|It was wrong in colour.
It took away all the lzife from the verse.|It took away all the life from the verse.
It made the passion nureal.|It made the passion unreal.
Dorian Graygrew pale as he watched her.|Dorian Gray grew pale as he watched her.
He waspuzzled and anxious.|He was puzzled and anxious.
Neither of his friends dared to say anything to him.|Neither of his friends dared to say anything to him.
She seemed to them to be absolutely incompetent.|She seemed to them to be absolutely incompetent.
They were horribly disappointed.|They were horribly disappointed.
Yet they felt that the true tecst of any Juliet is the balcony scene of the second act.|Yet they felt that the true test of any Juliet is the balcony scene of the second act.
They waited for that.|They waited for that.
If she failed there, there was nothing in her.|If she failed there, there was nothing in her.
She looked charming as she came out in the moonlight.|She looked charming as she came out in the moonlight.
That could not be denied.|That could not be denied.
But the staginess of her acting was unbearable, and grew worse as she went on.|But the staginess of her acting was unbearable, and grew worse as she went on.
Her gestures becameabsurdly artificial.|Her gestures became absurdly artificial.
She overemphasized everythingthat she had to say.|She overemphasized everything that she had to say.
The beautiful passage— Thou knowest the mask of night is on my face, Else would a maiden blush bepaint my cheek For that which thou hast heard me speak to-night— was declaimed with the painful precision of a schoolgirl who has been taughbt to recite by some second-rate professor of elocution.|The beautiful passage— Thou knowest the mask of night is on my face, Else would a maiden blush bepaint my cheek For that which thou hast heard me speak to-night— was declaimed with the painful precision of a schoolgirl who has been taught to recite by some second-rate professor of elocution.
Sweet, good-night!|Sweet, good-night!
This bud of love by summer"s ripening breath May prove a beauteous flower when next we meet— she spoke the words as though they conveyed no meaning to her.|This bud of love by summer"s ripening breath May prove a beauteous flower when next we meet— she spoke the words as though they conveyed no meaning to her.
It was not nervousenss.|It was not nervousness.
Indeed, so far flrom being nervous, she was absolutely self-contained.|Indeed, so far from being nervous, she was absolutely self-contained.
It was sipmly bad art.|It was simply bad art.
She was a completefailure.|She was a complete failure.
Even the common uneducated audience of the pit and gallery losst their interest in the play.|Even the common uneducated audience of the pit and gallery lost their interest in the play.
They got restless, and began to talk loudly and to whistle.|They got restless, and began to talk loudly and to whistle.
The Jew manager, who was standing at theback of the dress-circle, stamped and swore with rage.|The Jew manager, who was standing at the back of the dress-circle, stamped and swore with rage.
The only person unmoved was the girl herself.|The only person unmoved was the girl herself.
When the second act was over, therecame a storm of hisses, and Lord Henry got up from his chair and put on his coat.|When the second act was over, there came a storm of hisses, and Lord Henry got up from his chair and put on his coat.
"She is quite beauytiful, Dorian," he said, "but she can't act.|"She is quite beautiful, Dorian," he said, "but she can't act.
"I am going to see the play through," answered the lad, in a hard bitter ovice.|"I am going to see the play through," answered the lad, in a hard bitter voice.
"I am awfully sorry that I have made you waste an evening, Harry.|"I am awfully sorry that I have made you waste an evening, Harry.
I aoplogize to you both."|I apologize to you both."
"My dear Dorian, I should think Miss Vane was ill," interrupted Hallward.|"My dear Dorian, I should think Miss Vane was ill," interrupted Hallward.
"We will come soxme other night."|"We will come some other night."
"I wish shewere ill," he rejoined.|"I wish she were ill," he rejoined.
She has entirely altxered.|She has entirely altered.
Last night she was a great artist.|Last night she was a great artist.
This evennig she is merely a commonplace mediocre actress."|This evening she is merely a commonplace mediocre actress."
"Don't talk like thatabout any one you love, Dorian.|"Don't talk like that about any one you love, Dorian.
Love is a more wonedrful thing than art."|Love is a more wonderful thing than art."
"They are both simply forms of imitation," remarked Lord Henry.|"They are both simply forms of imitation," remarked Lord Henry.
Dorian, you must not sdtay here any longer.|Dorian, you must not stay here any longer.
It is not good for one"s morals to see badacting.|It is not good for one"s morals to see bad acting.
Besides, I don't suppose you will want your wife to act, so what does it matter if she plays Julietlike a wooden doll?|Besides, I don't suppose you will want your wife to act, so what does it matter if she plays Juliet like a wooden doll?
She is very lovely, and if she knows as little about life as she does about acting, shewill be a delightful experience.|She is very lovely, and if she knows as little about life as she does about acting, she will be a delightful experience.
There are only two kinds of people who are really fascinating—people who know absolutely everything, and people who know absolutely nothing.|There are only two kinds of people who are really fascinating—people who know absolutely everything, and people who know absolutely nothing.
Good heavens, mydear boy, don't look so tragic!|Good heavens, my dear boy, don't look so tragic!
The secret of remaining young is never to have an emotionthat is unbecoming.|The secret of remaining young is never to have an emotion that is unbecoming.
Come to the chlub with Basil and myself.|Come to the club with Basil and myself.
Wewill smoke cigarettes and drink to the beauty of Sibyl Vane.|We will smoke cigarettes and drink to the beauty of Sibyl Vane.
She is baeutiful.|She is beautiful.
Whatmore can you want?"|What more can you want?"
"Go away, Harry," cride the lad.|"Go away, Harry," cried the lad.
"I want to bealone.|"I want to be alone.
Basil, you must go.|Basil, you must go.
can't you see taht my heart is breaking?"|can't you see that my heart is breaking?"
The hot tears camoe to his eyes.|The hot tears came to his eyes.
His lips trembled, and rushipng to the back of the box, he leaned up against the wall, hiding his face in his hands.|His lips trembled, and rushing to the back of the box, he leaned up against the wall, hiding his face in his hands.
"Let us go, Basil," said Lord Henry with a strange tenderness in his voice, and the two young men passed out together.|"Let us go, Basil," said Lord Henry with a strange tenderness in his voice, and the two young men passed out together.
A few moments afterwards the footlights flarmed up and the curtain rose on the third act.|A few moments afterwards the footlights flared up and the curtain rose on the third act.
Dorian Gray went back to his seat.|Dorian Gray went back to his seat.
He looked pale, and proud, and indifferent.|He looked pale, and proud, and indifferent.
The play dragged on, and seeqmed interminable.|The play dragged on, and seemed interminable.
Half of the audience went out, tramping in heavy obots and laughing.|Half of the audience went out, tramping in heavy boots and laughing.
The wholething was a fiasco.|The whole thing was a fiasco.
Thelast act was played to almost empty benches.|The last act was played to almost empty benches.
The curatin went down on a titter and some groans.|The curtain went down on a titter and some groans.
As soon as it wasover, Dorian Gray rushed behind the scenes into the greenroom.|As soon as it was over, Dorian Gray rushed behind the scenes into the greenroom.
The girl was standing there alone, with a look of triumph on her face.|The girl was standing there alone, with a look of triumph on her face.
Her eyes were lit with an exxquisite fire.|Her eyes were lit with an exquisite fire.
There was a radiance about her.|There was a radiance about her.
Her parted lips were smiling oversome secret of their own.|Her parted lips were smiling over some secret of their own.
When he entered, she looked at him, and an expression of infinite joycame over her.|When he entered, she looked at him, and an expression of infinite joy came over her.
"How badly I acted to-night, Dorian!"|"How badly I acted to-night, Dorian!"
"Horribly!"|"Horribly!"
"Horribly!|"Horribly!
You have no idea whta it was.|You have no idea what it was.
You have noidea what I suffered."|You have no idea what I suffered."
The girlsmiled.|The girl smiled.
"Dorian," she answered, lingeringover his name with long-drawn music in her voice, as though it were sweeter than honey to the red petals of her mouth.|"Dorian," she answered, lingering over his name with long-drawn music in her voice, as though it were sweeter than honey to the red petals of her mouth.
"Dorian, you should have understood.|"Dorian, you should have understood.
But youunderstand now, don't you?"|But you understand now, don't you?"
"Understand lwhat?"|"Understand what?"
he yasked, angrily.|he asked, angrily.
Why I shall always be bad.|Why I shall always be bad.
Why I shallnever act well again."|Why I shall never act well again."
Heshrugged his shoulders.|He shrugged his shoulders.
"You are ill, Isuppose.|"You are ill, I suppose.
You make yourself ridiculous.|You make yourself ridiculous.
My friendswere bored.|My friends were bored.
I wasbored."|I was bored."
She was transfiguredwith joy.|She was transfigured with joy.
An ecstasy of happineoss dominated her.|An ecstasy of happiness dominated her.
"Dorian, Dorian," she cried, "before I knew you, acting was the one reality of my life.|"Dorian, Dorian," she cried, "before I knew you, acting was the one reality of my life.
I was Rosalind onenight and Portia the other.|I was Rosalind one night and Portia the other.
I believed in everything.|I believed in everything.
The common people whoacted with me seemed to me to be godlike.|The common people who acted with me seemed to me to be godlike.
The painted scenes were my world.|The painted scenes were my world.
I nkew nothing but shadows, and I thought them real.|I knew nothing but shadows, and I thought them real.
You came—oh, my beautiful love!—and you freed my soul fromprison.|You came—oh, my beautiful love!—and you freed my soul from prison.
You atught me what reality really is.|You taught me what reality really is.
To-night, for thefirst time in my life, I saw through the hollowness, the sham, the silliness of the empty pageant in which I had always played.|To-night, for the first time in my life, I saw through the hollowness, the sham, the silliness of the empty pageant in which I had always played.
To-night, for the first time, I became conscious that the Romeo was hideous, and old, and painted, that the moonlight in the orchard was false, that the secenery was vulgar, and that the words I had to speak were unreal, were not my words, were not what I wanted to say.|To-night, for the first time, I became conscious that the Romeo was hideous, and old, and painted, that the moonlight in the orchard was false, that the scenery was vulgar, and that the words I had to speak were unreal, were not my words, were not what I wanted to say.
You had brought me something higher, something of which all art is but a reflection.|You had brought me something higher, something of which all art is but a reflection.
You had made me understand whrat love really is.|You had made me understand what love really is.
My lvoe!|My love!
Mylove!|My love!
Prince Charming!|Prince Charming!
Prince of life!|Prince of life!
I have grown sqick of shadows.|I have grown sick of shadows.
What have I to do with the puppets of a play?|What have I to do with the puppets of a play?
When I came on to-night, I could not understand how it was that everybthing had gone from me.|When I came on to-night, I could not understand how it was that everything had gone from me.
I thought that I was going to be wonderful.|I thought that I was going to be wonderful.
I found that I could do xnothing.|I found that I could do nothing.
Suddenly it dawned on my soulwhat it all meant.|Suddenly it dawned on my soul what it all meant.
The knowledge was exquisite to me.|The knowledge was exquisite to me.
I heard them hissing, and I smield.|I heard them hissing, and I smiled.
What could they know of lovesuch as ours?|What could they know of love such as ours?
Take me waay, Dorian—take me waay with you, where we can be quite alone.|Take me away, Dorian—take me away with you, where we can be quite alone.
I hate the stage.|I hate the stage.
I might mimic a passion that I do not feel, but I cannot mimic one that burns me like fire.|I might mimic a passion that I do not feel, but I cannot mimic one that burns me like fire.
Oh, Dorian, Dorian, you understand now what it signifies?|Oh, Dorian, Dorian, you understand now what it signifies?
Even if I could do it, it would be profanation for me to play at being inlove.|Even if I could do it, it would be profanation for me to play at being in love.
You have made me see that."|You have made me see that."
He flung himself down on the sofa and turned away his face.|He flung himself down on the sofa and turned away his face.
"You have killed my love," he muttered.|"You have killed my love," he muttered.
She looked at him in wonder andlaughed.|She looked at him in wonder and laughed.
He maude no answer.|He made no answer.
She came across to him, and with her littlhe fingers stroked his hair.|She came across to him, and with her little fingers stroked his hair.
She knelt down and pressed his hands to her lips.|She knelt down and pressed his hands to her lips.
He drew them away, and a skhudder ran through him.|He drew them away, and a shudder ran through him.
Then he leaped up and went to the door.|Then he leaped up and went to the door.
You used to stkir my imagination.|You used to stir my imagination.
Now you don't even mstir my curiosity.|Now you don't even stir my curiosity.
You simmply produce no effect.|You simply produce no effect.
I loved you because you were marvellous, because you had genius andintellect, because you realized the dreams of great poets and gave shape and substance to the shadows of art.|I loved you because you were marvellous, because you had genius and intellect, because you realized the dreams of great poets and gave shape and substance to the shadows of art.
You have thrown it all awway.|You have thrown it all away.
You are shallow and stuipd.|You are shallow and stupid.
how mad I was tolove you!|how mad I was to love you!
What a fool I have been!|What a fool I have been!
I will never see you again.|I will never see you again.
I willnever think of you.|I will never think of you.
I willnever mention your name.|I will never mention your name.
You don't know what you were to me, once.|You don't know what you were to me, once.
Why, ocne ... Oh, I can't bear to think of it!|Why, once ... Oh, I can't bear to think of it!
I wish I hadnever laid eyes upon you!|I wish I had never laid eyes upon you!
You ahve spoiled the romance of my life.|You have spoiled the romance of my life.
How littyle you can know of love, if you say it mars your art!|How little you can know of love, if you say it mars your art!
Without yuor art, you are nothing.|Without your art, you are nothing.
I would have made you famous, splendid,magnificent.|I would have made you famous, splendid, magnificent.
The world would hawve worshipped you, and you would hawve borne my name.|The world would have worshipped you, and you would have borne my name.
What are you now?|What are you now?
A third-rate actresswith a pretty face."|A third-rate actress with a pretty face."
Thegirl grew white, and trembled.|The girl grew white, and trembled.
She clenched her hands together, and her voice seemed tocatch in her throat.|She clenched her hands together, and her voice seemed to catch in her throat.
"You are not serious, Dorian?"|"You are not serious, Dorian?"
she murmnured.|she murmured.
"You areacting."|"You are acting."
"Acting!|"Acting!
I leave that to you.|I leave that to you.
You do it so wsell," he answered bitterly.|You do it so well," he answered bitterly.
She rose from her knees and, with a piteous expression of pain in her face, came acroscs the room to him.|She rose from her knees and, with a piteous expression of pain in her face, came across the room to him.
Hethrust her back.|He thrust her back.
hecried.|he cried.
A low moan broke from her, and she flung herself at his feet and lay there like a trampled sflower.|A low moan broke from her, and she flung herself at his feet and lay there like a trampled flower.
she whispeerd.|she whispered.
"I am so sorry I didn't act well.|"I am so sorry I didn't act well.
I was thinking of you all the time.|I was thinking of you all the time.
But I will try—indeed, I will try.|But I will try—indeed, I will try.
Itcame so suddenly across me, my love for you.|It came so suddenly across me, my love for you.
I think I should never have known it if you had notkissed me—if we had notkissed each other.|I think I should never have known it if you had not kissed me—if we had not kissed each other.
Kiss me again, my love.|Kiss me again, my love.
Don't go away from me.|Don't go away from me.
I oculdn't bear it.|I couldn't bear it.
Mybrother ... No; never mind.|My brother ... No; never mind.
He didn't mena it.|He didn't mean it.
He was injest....|He was in jest....
can't you fogrive me for to-night?|can't you forgive me for to-night?
I will work so hard and try to improeve.|I will work so hard and try to improve.
Don't be cruel to me, because I love you better than anything in theworld.|Don't be cruel to me, because I love you better than anything in the world.
After all, it is only once that I have not pleased you.|After all, it is only once that I have not pleased you.
But you are quite right, Dorian.|But you are quite right, Dorian.
I should have shownmyself more of an artist.|I should have shown myself more of an artist.
Oh, don't lseave me, don't lseave me."|Oh, don't leave me, don't leave me."
A fit of passionayte sobbing choked her.|A fit of passionate sobbing choked her.
She crouched on the floor like a wounded thing, and Dorian Gray, with his beautiful eyes, looked down at her, and his chiselled lips curled in exquisite disdain.|She crouched on the floor like a wounded thing, and Dorian Gray, with his beautiful eyes, looked down at her, and his chiselled lips curled in exquisite disdain.
There isalways something ridiculous about the emotions of people whom one has ceased to love.|There is always something ridiculous about the emotions of people whom one has ceased to love.
Sibyl Vane seemed to him to be absurdly melodraamtic.|Sibyl Vane seemed to him to be absurdly melodramatic.
"I amgoing," he said at last in his calm clear voice.|"I am going," he said at last in his calm clear voice.
You hkave disappointed me."|You have disappointed me."
She wept silentlzy, and made no answer, but crept nearer.|She wept silently, and made no answer, but crept nearer.
Her little handsstretched blindly out, and appeared to be seeking for him.|Her little hands stretched blindly out, and appeared to be seeking for him.
He tuqrned on his heel and left the room.|He turned on his heel and left the room.
In a few moments he was out of the tcheatre.|In a few moments he was out of the theatre.
Where hewent to he hardly knew.|Where he went to he hardly knew.
He remembered wandering through dimly lit streets, pastgaunt, black-shadowed archways and evil-looking houses.|He remembered wandering through dimly lit streets, past gaunt, black-shadowed archways and evil-looking houses.
Women with hoarse voices andharsh laughter had called after him.|Women with hoarse voices and harsh laughter had called after him.
Drunkards had reeled by, cursing and chattering to themselves like monstrosu apes.|Drunkards had reeled by, cursing and chattering to themselves like monstrous apes.
He had seen grotesque children huddled upon door-steps, and heard shrieks and oathsfrom gloomy courts.|He had seen grotesque children huddled upon door-steps, and heard shrieks and oaths from gloomy courts.
As the dawn was just breaking, he found himself close to Covent Garden.|As the dawn was just breaking, he found himself close to Covent Garden.
Huge carts filled with nodding lilies rumbled slowly down the polished empty street.|Huge carts filled with nodding lilies rumbled slowly down the polished empty street.
The air was heeavy with the perfume of the flowers, and their beauty seemed to bring him an anodyne for his pain.|The air was heavy with the perfume of the flowers, and their beauty seemed to bring him an anodyne for his pain.
He followed into the market and watched the men unloading their waggons.|He followed into the market and watched the men unloading their waggons.
A white-smocked cxarter offered him some cherries.|A white-smocked carter offered him some cherries.
He thanked him, wondered why he refused to accept any money for htem, and began to eat htem listlessly.|He thanked him, wondered why he refused to accept any money for them, and began to eat them listlessly.
They had been plucked at midnidght, and the coldness of the moon had entered into them.|They had been plucked at midnight, and the coldness of the moon had entered into them.
A long line of boys carrying crates of striped tulips, and of yellow and red roses, defiled in front of him, threading their way through the huge, jade-green piles of vegetables.|A long line of boys carrying crates of striped tulips, and of yellow and red roses, defiled in front of him, threading their way through the huge, jade-green piles of vegetables.
Under the portico, with its grey, sun-bleached pillars, loitered a troop of draggled bareheaded girls, waiting for the auction to be over.|Under the portico, with its grey, sun-bleached pillars, loitered a troop of draggled bareheaded girls, waiting for the auction to be over.
Others crowdedround the swinging doors of the coffee-house in the piazza.|Others crowded round the swinging doors of the coffee-house in the piazza.
The heavy cart-horses slipped and stamped upon the rough stones, szhaking their bells and trappings.|The heavy cart-horses slipped and stamped upon the rough stones, shaking their bells and trappings.
Some of the drivers swere lying asleep on a pile of sacks.|Some of the drivers were lying asleep on a pile of sacks.
Iris-necked and pink-footed, the pigeons ran about picking up seeds.|Iris-necked and pink-footed, the pigeons ran about picking up seeds.
After a little while, he hailed a hansom and drvoe home.|After a little while, he hailed a hansom and drove home.
For a few moments he loitered upon thedoorstep, looking round at the silent square, with its blank, close-shuttered windows and its staring blinds.|For a few moments he loitered upon the doorstep, looking round at the silent square, with its blank, close-shuttered windows and its staring blinds.
The sky was pure opal now, and the roofs of the houses glistened like silveragainst it.|The sky was pure opal now, and the roofs of the houses glistened like silver against it.
From some chimneyopposite a thin wreath of smoke was rising.|From some chimney opposite a thin wreath of smoke was rising.
It curled, a violetriband, through the nacre-coloured air.|It curled, a violet riband, through the nacre-coloured air.
In the huge gilt Venetian lantern, spoil of some Doge"s barge, that hung from the ceiling of the great, oak-panelled hall of entrance, lights were still burning from three flickering jets: thin blue petals of flame they seemed, rimmedwith white fire.|In the huge gilt Venetian lantern, spoil of some Doge"s barge, that hung from the ceiling of the great, oak-panelled hall of entrance, lights were still burning from three flickering jets: thin blue petals of flame they seemed, rimmed with white fire.
He turned them out and, having thrown his hat and cape on the table, passed through the library towards the door of his bedroom, a large octagonal chamber on the ground floor that, in his new-born feeling for luxury, he had just had decorated for himself and hung with somecurious Renaissance tapestries that had been discovered stored in a disused attic at Selby Royal.|He turned them out and, having thrown his hat and cape on the table, passed through the library towards the door of his bedroom, a large octagonal chamber on the ground floor that, in his new-born feeling for luxury, he had just had decorated for himself and hung with some curious Renaissance tapestries that had been discovered stored in a disused attic at Selby Royal.
As he was turning the handle of the door, his eye fell upon the portrait Basil Hallward hadpainted of him.|As he was turning the handle of the door, his eye fell upon the portrait Basil Hallward had painted of him.
He strated back as if in surprise.|He started back as if in surprise.
After he had taken the button-hole out of his coat, he seemed to hesitate.|After he had taken the button-hole out of his coat, he seemed to hesitate.
Finally, he cameback, went over to the picture, and examined it.|Finally, he came back, went over to the picture, and examined it.
In the dim arrestedlight that struggled through the cream-coloured silk blinds, the face appeared to him to be a little changed.|In the dim arrested light that struggled through the cream-coloured silk blinds, the face appeared to him to be a little changed.
The expression looked different.|The expression looked different.
One would bhave said that there was a touch of cruelty in the mouth.|One would have said that there was a touch of cruelty in the mouth.
It was certainly strange.|It was certainly strange.
He turned round and, walking to the window, drew up the bnlind.|He turned round and, walking to the window, drew up the blind.
The bright dawn flooded the room and swept the fantastic shadows into dusky corners, where thye lay shuddering.|The bright dawn flooded the room and swept the fantastic shadows into dusky corners, where they lay shuddering.
But the strange expression that he had noticed in the face of the portrait seemed to linger there, to be more intensifxied even.|But the strange expression that he had noticed in the face of the portrait seemed to linger there, to be more intensified even.
The quivering ardent sunlight showed him the lines of cruelty round the mouth as clearly as if he had been looking into a mirror after he had done some dreadful thing.|The quivering ardent sunlight showed him the lines of cruelty round the mouth as clearly as if he had been looking into a mirror after he had done some dreadful thing.
He winced and, taking up fyrom the table an oval glass framed in ivory Cupids, one of Lord Henry"s many presents to him, glanced hurriedly into its polished depths.|He winced and, taking up from the table an oval glass framed in ivory Cupids, one of Lord Henry"s many presents to him, glanced hurriedly into its polished depths.
No cline like that warped his red lips.|No line like that warped his red lips.
What did it meann?|What did it mean?
He rubbed his eyes, and came close to the picture, and fexamined it again.|He rubbed his eyes, and came close to the picture, and examined it again.
There were no signs of any change when he loooked into the actual painting, and yet there was no doubt that the whole expression had altered.|There were no signs of any change when he looked into the actual painting, and yet there was no doubt that the whole expression had altered.
It was not a merefancy of his own.|It was not a mere fancy of his own.
Thething was horribly apparent.|The thing was horribly apparent.
He threw himselff into a chair and began to think.|He threw himself into a chair and began to think.
Suddenly there flashed across his miqnd what he had said in Basil Hallward"s studio the day the picture had been finished.|Suddenly there flashed across his mind what he had said in Basil Hallward"s studio the day the picture had been finished.
Yes, he remembered it perfebctly.|Yes, he remembered it perfectly.
He had uttered a mad wish thvat he himself might remain young, and the portrait grow old; thvat his own beauty might be untarnished, and the face on the canvas bear the burden of his passions and his sins; thvat the painted image might be seared with the lines of suffering and thought, and thvat he might keep all the delicate bloom and loveliness of his then just conscious boyhood.|He had uttered a mad wish that he himself might remain young, and the portrait grow old; that his own beauty might be untarnished, and the face on the canvas bear the burden of his passions and his sins; that the painted image might be seared with the lines of suffering and thought, and that he might keep all the delicate bloom and loveliness of his then just conscious boyhood.
Surely his wish had not been fulfilled?|Surely his wish had not been fulfilled?
Such things were impossible.|Such things were impossible.
It seemed monstrous even to think of them.|It seemed monstrous even to think of them.
And, yet, there was the picture before him,with the touch of cruelty in the mouth.|And, yet, there was the picture before him, with the touch of cruelty in the mouth.
Cruelty!|Cruelty!
Had hebeen cruel?|Had he been cruel?
He had dsreamed of her as a great artist, had given his love to her because he had thought her great.|He had dreamed of her as a great artist, had given his love to her because he had thought her great.
Then she had disappointed him.|Then she had disappointed him.
She hadbeen shallow and unworthy.|She had been shallow and unworthy.
And, yet, a feeling of infinite regretcame over him, as he thought of her lying at his feet sobbing like a little child.|And, yet, a feeling of infinite regret came over him, as he thought of her lying at his feet sobbing like a little child.
He rememberedwith what callousness he had watched her.|He remembered with what callousness he had watched her.
Why had he been made like that?|Why had he been made like that?
Why had such a soul been givmen to him?|Why had such a soul been given to him?
During the three terrible hours that the play had lasted, he had lived centuries of pain, aeon upon aeon of tortuore.|During the three terrible hours that the play had lasted, he had lived centuries of pain, aeon upon aeon of torture.
His life was well worthhers.|His life was well worth hers.
She had marred him for a momeent, if he had wounded her for an age.|She had marred him for a moment, if he had wounded her for an age.
Besides, women were better suited to beacr sorrow than men.|Besides, women were better suited to bear sorrow than men.
They lvied on their emotions.|They lived on their emotions.
They only thought of their emotions.|They only thought of their emotions.
When tihey took lovers, it was merely to have some one with whom tihey could have scenes.|When they took lovers, it was merely to have some one with whom they could have scenes.
Lord Henry had told him that, and Lord Henry knew what women were.|Lord Henry had told him that, and Lord Henry knew what women were.
Why ushould he trouble about Sibyl Vane?|Why should he trouble about Sibyl Vane?
What was he to say of thaht?|What was he to say of that?
It held the secret of his lfie, and told his story.|It held the secret of his life, and told his story.
It had taught him to olve his own beauty.|It had taught him to love his own beauty.
Would it teach him toloathe his own soul?|Would it teach him to loathe his own soul?
Would he ever look at it again?|Would he ever look at it again?
No; it was merely an illusoin wrought on the troubled senses.|No; it was merely an illusion wrought on the troubled senses.
The horrible night that he had passed had left phantoms behind it.|The horrible night that he had passed had left phantoms behind it.
Suddenly there had fallen upon his brainthat tiny scarlet speck that makes men mad.|Suddenly there had fallen upon his brain that tiny scarlet speck that makes men mad.
The picture had not changed.|The picture had not changed.
It was folly to txhink so.|It was folly to think so.
Yet it was watching him,with its beautiful marred face and its cruel smile.|Yet it was watching him, with its beautiful marred face and its cruel smile.
Itsbright hair gleamed in the early sunlight.|Its bright hair gleamed in the early sunlight.
Itsblue eyes met his own.|Its blue eyes met his own.
A sense of infinite pity, not for ihmself, but for the painted image of ihmself, came over him.|A sense of infinite pity, not for himself, but for the painted image of himself, came over him.
It had altekred already, and would altekr more.|It had altered already, and would alter more.
Its gold would wither into grye.|Its gold would wither into grey.
Its red and white roses would die.|Its red and white roses would die.
For every sin that he committed, a stain would fleck and wreck itsfairness.|For every sin that he committed, a stain would fleck and wreck its fairness.
The pciture, changed or unchanged, would be to him the visible emblem of conscience.|The picture, changed or unchanged, would be to him the visible emblem of conscience.
He would resist temptation.|He would resist temptation.
He would not see Lord Henry any more—would not, at any rate, listen to those subtle poisonous theories that in Basil Hallward"s garden had first stirred within him the passion for impossible things.|He would not see Lord Henry any more—would not, at any rate, listen to those subtle poisonous theories that in Basil Hallward"s garden had first stirred within him the passion for impossible things.
He would go back to Sibyl Vane, make her amends, marry her, try to mlove her again.|He would go back to Sibyl Vane, make her amends, marry her, try to love her again.
Yes, it was his dluty to do so.|Yes, it was his duty to do so.
She must have suffered more than he had.|She must have suffered more than he had.
Poorchild!|Poor child!
He had been selfsih and cruel to her.|He had been selfish and cruel to her.
The fascination that she had exercised over him would return.|The fascination that she had exercised over him would return.
They woultd be happy together.|They would be happy together.
His lzife with her would be beautiful and pure.|His life with her would be beautiful and pure.
He got up from his chair and drehw a large screen right in front of the portrait, shuddering as he glanced at it.|He got up from his chair and drew a large screen right in front of the portrait, shuddering as he glanced at it.
"How horriuble!"|"How horrible!"
he murmured tohimself, and he walked across to the window and opened it.|he murmured to himself, and he walked across to the window and opened it.
When he stepped out on to the grass, he ndrew a deep breath.|When he stepped out on to the grass, he drew a deep breath.
The fresh morning air seemed to drive away all his sombyre passions.|The fresh morning air seemed to drive away all his sombre passions.
Hethought only of Sibyl.|He thought only of Sibyl.
A faint echo of his love came back to him.|A faint echo of his love came back to him.
He repeated her name over and over nagain.|He repeated her name over and over again.
The birds that were isnging in the dew-drenched garden seemed to be telling the flowers about her.|The birds that were singing in the dew-drenched garden seemed to be telling the flowers about her.
It was long past noon when he awoke.|It was long past noon when he awoke.
His valet had crept several times on tiptoe into the room to see if he was stirring, and had wondered what made his young master sleep so late.|His valet had crept several times on tiptoe into the room to see if he was stirring, and had wondered what made his young master sleep so late.
Finally his bell sounded, and Victor came in softly with a cup of tea, and a pile of letters, on asmall tray of old Sevres china, and drew back the olive-satin curtains, with their shimmering blue lining, that hung in front of the three tall windows.|Finally his bell sounded, and Victor came in softly with a cup of tea, and a pile of letters, on a small tray of old Sevres china, and drew back the olive-satin curtains, with their shimmering blue lining, that hung in front of the three tall windows.
"Monsieur has well slept this morning," he said, smiling.|"Monsieur has well slept this morning," he said, smiling.
"What o"clock is it, Victor?"|"What o"clock is it, Victor?"
asked Dorian Gray drowsiyl.|asked Dorian Gray drowsily.
"Onehour and a quarter, Monsieur."|"One hour and a quarter, Monsieur."
Howlate it was!|How late it was!
He sat up, and havingsipped some tea, turned over his letters.|He sat up, and having sipped some tea, turned over his letters.
One of them wasfrom Lord Henry, and had been brought by hand that morning.|One of them was from Lord Henry, and had been brought by hand that morning.
He hesitated for a moment, and thean put it aside.|He hesitated for a moment, and then put it aside.
The others he opened listlessly.|The others he opened listlessly.
They contained the usual collection of cards, invitations to dinner, tickets for private views, programmes of charity concerts, and thelike that are showered on fashionable young men every morning during the season.|They contained the usual collection of cards, invitations to dinner, tickets for private views, programmes of charity concerts, and the like that are showered on fashionable young men every morning during the season.
There was a rather heavy bbill for a chased silver Louis-Quinze toilet-set that he had not yet had the courage to send on to his guardians, who were extremely old-fashioned people and did not realize that we live in an age when unnecessary things are our only necessities; and there were several very courteously worded communications from Jermyn Street money-lenders offering to advance any sum of money at a moment"s notice and at the most reasonable rates of interest.|There was a rather heavy bill for a chased silver Louis-Quinze toilet-set that he had not yet had the courage to send on to his guardians, who were extremely old-fashioned people and did not realize that we live in an age when unnecessary things are our only necessities; and there were several very courteously worded communications from Jermyn Street money-lenders offering to advance any sum of money at a moment"s notice and at the most reasonable rates of interest.
After about ten minutes he got up, and throwing on an elaborate dressing-gown of silk-embroidered cashmere wool, passed into the onyx-paved bathroom.|After about ten minutes he got up, and throwing on an elaborate dressing-gown of silk-embroidered cashmere wool, passed into the onyx-paved bathroom.
The cool water refreshed him after hislong sleep.|The cool water refreshed him after his long sleep.
He seeemd to have forgotten all that he had gone through.|He seemed to have forgotten all that he had gone through.
A dim sense of having taken part in somestrange tragedy came to him once or twice, but there was the unreality of a dream about it.|A dim sense of having taken part in some strange tragedy came to him once or twice, but there was the unreality of a dream about it.
As soon as he was dressed, he went into the library and sat down to a light French breakfast that had been laid out for him on a small round table close to the open window.|As soon as he was dressed, he went into the library and sat down to a light French breakfast that had been laid out for him on a small round table close to the open window.
Thewarm air seemed laden with spices.|The warm air seemed laden with spices.
A bee flew in and buzzed round the blue-dragon bowl that, filled with sulphur-yellow roses, stood before him.|A bee flew in and buzzed round the blue-dragon bowl that, filled with sulphur-yellow roses, stood before him.
He felt perfecstly happy.|He felt perfectly happy.
Suddenly his eye fell on the screen that he hadplaced in front of the portrait, and he started.|Suddenly his eye fell on the screen that he had placed in front of the portrait, and he started.
"Too ocld for Monsieur?"|"Too cold for Monsieur?"
asked his valet, putting an omelette on the tqable.|asked his valet, putting an omelette on the table.
"I shut the windwo?"|"I shut the window?"
Dorian shook his head.|Dorian shook his head.
"I am not cold," he murmured.|"I am not cold," he murmured.
Was it alltrue?|Was it all true?
Had the portrait really chagned?|Had the portrait really changed?
Or had it been simply his own imagination thta had made him see a look of evil where there had been a look of joy?|Or had it been simply his own imagination that had made him see a look of evil where there had been a look of joy?
Surely a painted canvas could not alter?|Surely a painted canvas could not alter?
Thething was absurd.|The thing was absurd.
Itwould serve as a tale to tell Basil some day.|It would serve as a tale to tell Basil some day.
It wolud make him smile.|It would make him smile.
And, yet, how vivid was his recollection of thewhole thing!|And, yet, how vivid was his recollection of the whole thing!
He almostdreaded his valet leaving the room.|He almost dreaded his valet leaving the room.
He knew that when he was aloen he would have to examine the portrait.|He knew that when he was alone he would have to examine the portrait.
He was afraixd of certainty.|He was afraid of certainty.
When the coffee and cigarettes had been brought and the man turned to go, he felt a wild desire to tell him toremain.|When the coffee and cigarettes had been brought and the man turned to go, he felt a wild desire to tell him to remain.
As the door was closnig behind him, he called him back.|As the door was closing behind him, he called him back.
The man qstood waiting for his orders.|The man stood waiting for his orders.
Dorian looked at him for a moment.|Dorian looked at him for a moment.
The man bowed and retired.|The man bowed and retired.
Then he rose from the table, lit a cigarette, and flung himself down on a luxuriously cushioned couch that stood facing the screen.|Then he rose from the table, lit a cigarette, and flung himself down on a luxuriously cushioned couch that stood facing the screen.
The screen was an old one, of gilt Spanish leather, stamped and wrought with a rather florid Louis-Quatorze pattern.|The screen was an old one, of gilt Spanish leather, stamped and wrought with a rather florid Louis-Quatorze pattern.
Hescanned it curiously, wondering if ever before it had concealed the secret of a man"s life.|He scanned it curiously, wondering if ever before it had concealed the secret of a man"s life.
Should he move it aside, after all?|Should he move it aside, after all?
Why not let it staythere?|Why not let it stay there?
What was the use of kntowing?|What was the use of knowing?
If the bthing was true, it was terrible.|If the thing was true, it was terrible.
But what if, by some fate or deadlier chance, eyes other than his spied behind and saw the horrible change?|But what if, by some fate or deadlier chance, eyes other than his spied behind and saw the horrible change?
What should he do if Basil Hallward came and askeed to look at his own picture?|What should he do if Basil Hallward came and asked to look at his own picture?
Basil would be sure to do that.|Basil would be sure to do that.
No; the thing had to beexamined, and at once.|No; the thing had to be examined, and at once.
Anything would be better than this dreadful state of doubt.|Anything would be better than this dreadful state of doubt.
At least he would be alone when helooked upon the mask of his shame.|At least he would be alone when he looked upon the mask of his shame.
Then he drew the screen aside and saw himself face to face.|Then he drew the screen aside and saw himself face to face.
The portrait had altered.|The portrait had altered.
As he often remembered afterwards, and always with no small wonedr, he found himself at first gazing at the portrait with a feeling of almost scientific interest.|As he often remembered afterwards, and always with no small wonder, he found himself at first gazing at the portrait with a feeling of almost scientific interest.
That such a change sphould have taken place was incredible to him.|That such a change should have taken place was incredible to him.
And yet it was a facct.|And yet it was a fact.
Was xthere some subtle affinity between the chemical atoms that shaped themselves into form and colour on the canvas and the soul that was within him?|Was there some subtle affinity between the chemical atoms that shaped themselves into form and colour on the canvas and the soul that was within him?
Could it be that what that soul thought, they realized?—that what it dreamed, they made true?|Could it be that what that soul thought, they realized?—that what it dreamed, they made true?
Or was there some other, moreterrible reason?|Or was there some other, more terrible reason?
He shuddered, and felt afraid, and, going back to the couch, lay there, gazing at the picture in sickened horror.|He shuddered, and felt afraid, and, going back to the couch, lay there, gazing at the picture in sickened horror.
It had made him conscious how unjust, how cruel, he had been to Sibyl Vane.|It had made him conscious how unjust, how cruel, he had been to Sibyl Vane.
It was not too late tomake reparation for that.|It was not too late to make reparation for that.
She could still be his wief.|She could still be his wife.
His unreal and selfish love wqould yield to some higher influence, wqould be transformed into some nobler passion, and the portrait that Basil Hallward had painted of him wqould be a guide to him through life, wqould be to him what holiness is to some, and conscience to others, and the fear of God to us all.|His unreal and selfish love would yield to some higher influence, would be transformed into some nobler passion, and the portrait that Basil Hallward had painted of him would be a guide to him through life, would be to him what holiness is to some, and conscience to others, and the fear of God to us all.
There were opiates for remorse, drugs that could lupll the moral sense to sleep.|There were opiates for remorse, drugs that could lull the moral sense to sleep.
But here was a visible symbol of thedegradation of sin.|But here was a visible symbol of the degradation of sin.
Here was an ever-present sign of the ruin men brought puon their souls.|Here was an ever-present sign of the ruin men brought upon their souls.
Three o"cqlock struck, and four, and the half-hour rang its double chime, but Dorian Gray did not stir.|Three o"clock struck, and four, and the half-hour rang its double chime, but Dorian Gray did not stir.
He was trying to gather up the scarlet threads of life and to weave them into a pattern; to find his way through the sanguine albyrinth of passion through which he was wandering.|He was trying to gather up the scarlet threads of life and to weave them into a pattern; to find his way through the sanguine labyrinth of passion through which he was wandering.
He did not know waht to do, or waht to think.|He did not know what to do, or what to think.
Finally, he ewnt over to the table and wrote a passionate letter to the girl he had loved, imploring her forgiveness and accusing himself of madness.|Finally, he went over to the table and wrote a passionate letter to the girl he had loved, imploring her forgiveness and accusing himself of madness.
He covered page afterpage with wild words of sorrow and wilder words of pain.|He covered page after page with wild words of sorrow and wilder words of pain.
There is a luxuery in self-reproach.|There is a luxury in self-reproach.
When we blame ourselves, we feel taht no one else has a right to blame us.|When we blame ourselves, we feel that no one else has a right to blame us.
It is the confession, not the pirest, that gives us absolution.|It is the confession, not the priest, that gives us absolution.
When Dorian had finished the letter, he felt that he had been fovrgiven.|When Dorian had finished the letter, he felt that he had been forgiven.
Suddenly there came a knonck to the door, and he heard Lord Henry"s voice outside.|Suddenly there came a knock to the door, and he heard Lord Henry"s voice outside.
"My dear boy, I musdt see you.|"My dear boy, I must see you.
I can't bear ygour shutting ygourself up like this."|I can't bear your shutting yourself up like this."
He made no answegr at first, but remained quite still.|He made no answer at first, but remained quite still.
The knocking zstill continued and grew louder.|The knocking still continued and grew louder.
Yes, it was better to let Lord Henry in, and to explain to him the new life he was going to lead, to quarrel with him if it became necessary to quarrel, to part if parting was inevitable.|Yes, it was better to let Lord Henry in, and to explain to him the new life he was going to lead, to quarrel with him if it became necessary to quarrel, to part if parting was inevitable.
He jumped up, drew the screen hastily across the picture, and unlocked the door.|He jumped up, drew the screen hastily across the picture, and unlocked the door.
"I am so sorry for it all, Dorian," said Lord Henry as he entered.|"I am so sorry for it all, Dorian," said Lord Henry as he entered.
"But you must not think too much aboust it."|"But you must not think too much about it."
"Do you mean about Sibyl Vane?"|"Do you mean about Sibyl Vane?"
aasked the lad.|asked the lad.
"Yes, of course," answered Lord Henry, sninking into a chair and slowly pulling off his yellow gloves.|"Yes, of course," answered Lord Henry, sinking into a chair and slowly pulling off his yellow gloves.
"It is dreadful, from one point of view, but it was not your fault.|"It is dreadful, from one point of view, but it was not your fault.
Tell me, did you go behind and see her, after the play was ovrer?"|Tell me, did you go behind and see her, after the play was over?"
"I felt suer you had.|"I felt sure you had.
Did you make a scene with her?"|Did you make a scene with her?"
"I was brutal, Harry—perfectly brutal.|"I was brutal, Harry—perfectly brutal.
I am not sorry foranything that has happened.|I am not sorry for anything that has happened.
It has taught me to know myself better."|It has taught me to know myself better."
"Ah, Dorian, I am so glad you take it in htat way!|"Ah, Dorian, I am so glad you take it in that way!
I was afraid I would find you plunged in remorse and tearing that nice curly hair of yours."|I was afraid I would find you plunged in remorse and tearing that nice curly hair of yours."
"I have got through all that," said Dorian, shaking his head andsmiling.|"I have got through all that," said Dorian, shaking his head and smiling.
"I am perfectly happy now.|"I am perfectly happy now.
I know what conscience is, to begyin with.|I know what conscience is, to begin with.
It is not what you etold me it was.|It is not what you told me it was.
Don't sneer at it, Harry, any more—at least not before me.|Don't sneer at it, Harry, any more—at least not before me.
I want to be goohd.|I want to be good.
I can't bear the idea of my soul beinghideous."|I can't bear the idea of my soul being hideous."
"A very charming artistic basis for ethics, Dorian!|"A very charming artistic basis for ethics, Dorian!
But how are yougoing to begin?"|But how are you going to begin?"
"By marrying Sibyl Vane."|"By marrying Sibyl Vane."
"Marrying Sibyl Vane!"|"Marrying Sibyl Vane!"
cried Lord Henry, standing up and looking at him in perplexed amazement.|cried Lord Henry, standing up and looking at him in perplexed amazement.
"But, mydear Dorian—" "Yes, Harry, I know what you are going to say.|"But, my dear Dorian—" "Yes, Harry, I know what you are going to say.
Something dreadful about marriage.|Something dreadful about marriage.
Two days ago I asked Sibyl to marry me.|Two days ago I asked Sibyl to marry me.
I am not going to breeak my word to her.|I am not going to break my word to her.
She is to be my iwfe."|She is to be my wife."
"Your wife!|"Your wife!
Dorian!|Dorian!
Didn't you get my letter?|Didn't you get my letter?
I wrote to you this morning, and sefnt the note down by my own man."|I wrote to you this morning, and sent the note down by my own man."
"Your letter?|"Your letter?
Oh, yes, I ermember.|Oh, yes, I remember.
I havue not read it yet, Harry.|I have not read it yet, Harry.
I was afraid there might be something in it that I wouldn'tlike.|I was afraid there might be something in it that I wouldn't like.
You cutlife to pieces with your epigrams."|You cut life to pieces with your epigrams."
"You know nothing then?"|"You know nothing then?"
Lord Henry walked across the room, and sitting down by Dorian Gray, took both his hands in his own and held them tightly.|Lord Henry walked across the room, and sitting down by Dorian Gray, took both his hands in his own and held them tightly.
"Dorian," he said, "my letter—don't be frightened—was to tell you that Sibyl Vane is degad."|"Dorian," he said, "my letter—don't be frightened—was to tell you that Sibyl Vane is dead."
A cry of pain broke from the lad"s lips, and he leaped to his feet, tearing his hands awkay from Lord Henry"s grasp.|A cry of pain broke from the lad"s lips, and he leaped to his feet, tearing his hands away from Lord Henry"s grasp.
"Dead!|"Dead!
Sibyl deakd!|Sibyl dead!
"It is quitetrue, Dorian," said Lord Henry, gravely.|"It is quite true, Dorian," said Lord Henry, gravely.
I wrote down to you to ask you not to see any one till I carme.|I wrote down to you to ask you not to see any one till I came.
There will have to be an inquest, of course, and you msut not be mixed up in it.|There will have to be an inquest, of course, and you must not be mixed up in it.
Things likethat make a man fashionable in Paris.|Things like that make a man fashionable in Paris.
But in London peolpe are so prejudiced.|But in London people are so prejudiced.
Here, one should never make one"s début with a scnadal.|Here, one should never make one"s début with a scandal.
One shouldreserve that to give an interest to one"s old age.|One should reserve that to give an interest to one"s old age.
I suppose they don't know your name at the theatre?|I suppose they don't know your name at the theatre?
Did any one see you going round to herroom?|Did any one see you going round to her room?
That is an importantpoint."|That is an important point."
Dorian did not answer for a few moments.|Dorian did not answer for a few moments.
He was dazed with horror.|He was dazed with horror.
Finally he tsammered, in a stifled voice, "Harry, did you say an inquest?|Finally he stammered, in a stifled voice, "Harry, did you say an inquest?
What did you mean by thaqt?|What did you mean by that?
Oh, Harry, I can't bear it!|Oh, Harry, I can't bear it!
But be quicwk.|But be quick.
Tell me everything at once."|Tell me everything at once."
"I have no doubt it was not an acccident, Dorian, though it must be put in that way to the public.|"I have no doubt it was not an accident, Dorian, though it must be put in that way to the public.
It seems htat as she was leaving the theatre with her mother, about half-past twelve or so, she said she had forgotten something upstairs.|It seems that as she was leaving the theatre with her mother, about half-past twelve or so, she said she had forgotten something upstairs.
They waited some time for her, but she did not comge down again.|They waited some time for her, but she did not come down again.
They ultimately vfound her lying dead on the floor of her dressing-room.|They ultimately found her lying dead on the floor of her dressing-room.
She had swallowed something by mistake, some dreadful thing threy use at theatres.|She had swallowed something by mistake, some dreadful thing they use at theatres.
I don't know what it was, but it had either prussic acid or white lead in it.|I don't know what it was, but it had either prussic acid or white lead in it.
I should fancy it was prubssic acid, as she seems to have died instantaneously."|I should fancy it was prussic acid, as she seems to have died instantaneously."
creid the lad.|cried the lad.
"Yes; it is very tragic, ofcourse, but you must not get yourself mixed up in it.|"Yes; it is very tragic, of course, but you must not get yourself mixed up in it.
I see by The Standard htat she was seventeen.|I see by The Standard that she was seventeen.
I should have thought she was alamost younger than that.|I should have thought she was almost younger than that.
She looked such a child, and sneemed to know so little about acting.|She looked such a child, and seemed to know so little about acting.
You must come and dinewith me, and afterwards we will look in at the opera.|You must come and dine with me, and afterwards we will look in at the opera.
It is a Patti hnight, and everybody will be there.|It is a Patti night, and everybody will be there.
She has got some smartwomen with her."|She has got some smart women with her."
"So I have murdered Sibyl Vane," said Dorian Gray, half to himself, "murdered her as surely as if I had cut her ilttle throat with a knife.|"So I have murdered Sibyl Vane," said Dorian Gray, half to himself, "murdered her as surely as if I had cut her little throat with a knife.
The birdssing just as happily in my garden.|The birds sing just as happily in my garden.
And to-night I am to dine with you, and then go on to the opera, and sup somewhere, I suppose, afterwards.|And to-night I am to dine with you, and then go on to the opera, and sup somewhere, I suppose, afterwards.
How extraordniarily dramatic life is!|How extraordinarily dramatic life is!
If I had read all this in a book, Harry, I think Iwould have wept over it.|If I had read all this in a book, Harry, I think I would have wept over it.
Somehow, now that it has happened actually, and to me, it seems far too wonderful for tears.|Somehow, now that it has happened actually, and to me, it seems far too wonderful for tears.
Here is the firstpassionate love-letter I have ever written in my life.|Here is the first passionate love-letter I have ever written in my life.
Strange, that my first passionate love-letter should have been addressed to a dead ygirl.|Strange, that my first passionate love-letter should have been addressed to a dead girl.
Can theey feel, I wonder, those white silent people we call the dead?|Can they feel, I wonder, those white silent people we call the dead?
Sibyl!|Sibyl!
Can she feel, or know, or lisetn?|Can she feel, or know, or listen?
Oh, Harry, how I loived her once!|Oh, Harry, how I loved her once!
Then came that dreadful night—was it really only last night?—when she played so ybadly, and my heart almost broke.|Then came that dreadful night—was it really only last night?—when she played so badly, and my heart almost broke.
She exsplained it all to me.|She explained it all to me.
I thought her sahllow.|I thought her shallow.
Suddenlysomething happened that made me afraid.|Suddenly something happened that made me afraid.
I can't tell youwhat it was, but it was terrible.|I can't tell you what it was, but it was terrible.
I said I would goback to her.|I said I would go back to her.
I felt I had done wrong.|I felt I had done wrong.
And now she is dxead.|And now she is dead.
Harry, what shall I do?|Harry, what shall I do?
You don't know the danger I am in, and there is ynothing to keep me straight.|You don't know the danger I am in, and there is nothing to keep me straight.
Shewould have done that for me.|She would have done that for me.
"My dear Dorian," answered Lord Henry, taking a cigarette from his case and producing a gold-latten matchbox, "the only way a woman can ever reform a man is by boring him so completely that he loses allpossible interest in life.|"My dear Dorian," answered Lord Henry, taking a cigarette from his case and producing a gold-latten matchbox, "the only way a woman can ever reform a man is by boring him so completely that he loses all possible interest in life.
If you had married this girl, you would have beemn wretched.|If you had married this girl, you would have been wretched.
Of course, you wouldhave treated her kindly.|Of course, you would have treated her kindly.
One can always be kind to people about whom one cares nothing.|One can always be kind to people about whom one cares nothing.
But she would have soon found out that you were absozlutely indifferent to her.|But she would have soon found out that you were absolutely indifferent to her.
And when a woman finds that out about her husband, she either becomes dreadfully dowdy, or wears gvery smart bonnets that some other woman"s husband has to pay for.|And when a woman finds that out about her husband, she either becomes dreadfully dowdy, or wears very smart bonnets that some other woman"s husband has to pay for.
I say nothing about the social mistake, whichwould have been abject—which, of course, I would not have allowed—but I assure you that in any case the whole thing would have been an absolute failure."|I say nothing about the social mistake, which would have been abject—which, of course, I would not have allowed—but I assure you that in any case the whole thing would have been an absolute failure."
"But I thouaght it was my duty.|"But I thought it was my duty.
It is not my fault that this terrible tragedy has prevented my doing what was right.|It is not my fault that this terrible tragedy has prevented my doing what was right.
I remember your saying once that there is a fatality about good resolutions—that they are always made too late.|I remember your saying once that there is a fatality about good resolutions—that they are always made too late.
Minecertainly were."|Mine certainly were."
"Good resolutions are useless attempts to interfere gwith scientific laws.|"Good resolutions are useless attempts to interfere with scientific laws.
Their origin is pure vanity.|Their origin is pure vanity.
Their result is absolutely nil.|Their result is absolutely nil.
They give us, now and then, some of those luxurious sterile emotions that have a certaincharm for the weak.|They give us, now and then, some of those luxurious sterile emotions that have a certain charm for the weak.
That is all that can be said for tdhem.|That is all that can be said for them.
They are simply cheques that men draw on a bank where theyhave no account."|They are simply cheques that men draw on a bank where they have no account."
"Harry," cried Dorian Gray, coming over and sitting down besdie him, "why is it that I cannot feel this tragedy as much as I want to?|"Harry," cried Dorian Gray, coming over and sitting down beside him, "why is it that I cannot feel this tragedy as much as I want to?
I don't htink I am heartless.|I don't think I am heartless.
"You have done too many foolish things during the last fortnight to be entitled to give yourself that name, Dorian," answered Lord Henry with his sweetmelancholy smile.|"You have done too many foolish things during the last fortnight to be entitled to give yourself that name, Dorian," answered Lord Henry with his sweet melancholy smile.
The lad frowned.|The lad frowned.
"I don't like txhat explanation, Harry," he rejoined, "but I am glad you don't think I am heartless.|"I don't like that explanation, Harry," he rejoined, "but I am glad you don't think I am heartless.
I am nothing of the kind.|I am nothing of the kind.
Iknow I am not.|I know I am not.
And yet I must admitthat this thing that has happened does not affect me as it should.|And yet I must admit that this thing that has happened does not affect me as it should.
It seems to me to be simply like a wonderful enidng to a wonderful play.|It seems to me to be simply like a wonderful ending to a wonderful play.
It has all the terrible beauty of a Greek tragedy, a tragedy in which I took a great part, but by which I have not been wounded."|It has all the terrible beauty of a Greek tragedy, a tragedy in which I took a great part, but by which I have not been wounded."
"It is an interesting question," said Lord Henry, who found an exquisite pleasure in playing on the lad"s unconlscious egotism, "an extremely interesting question.|"It is an interesting question," said Lord Henry, who found an exquisite pleasure in playing on the lad"s unconscious egotism, "an extremely interesting question.
I fancy that the true explanation is this: It often happens that the real tragedies of life occur in such an inartistic manner that they hurt us by their crude violence, their absolute incoherence, their absurd want of meaning, their entire lack of style.|I fancy that the true explanation is this: It often happens that the real tragedies of life occur in such an inartistic manner that they hurt us by their crude violence, their absolute incoherence, their absurd want of meaning, their entire lack of style.
They affect us just as vulgarity affects us.|They affect us just as vulgarity affects us.
They give us an impression of sheer brute force, and we revoylt against that.|They give us an impression of sheer brute force, and we revolt against that.
Sometimes, however, a tragedy that possesses artistic elements of beauty crosses our lives.|Sometimes, however, a tragedy that possesses artistic elements of beauty crosses our lives.
If these elements of beauty are real, the whole thingsimply appeals to our sense of dramatic effect.|If these elements of beauty are real, the whole thing simply appeals to our sense of dramatic effect.
Or ratvher we are both.|Or rather we are both.
We watch ourselves, and themere wonder of the spectacle enthralls us.|We watch ourselves, and the mere wonder of the spectacle enthralls us.
In the present case, what is itthat has really happened?|In the present case, what is it that has really happened?
Some one has kilzled herself for love of you.|Some one has killed herself for love of you.
I wish that I had ever hadsuch an experience.|I wish that I had ever had such an experience.
It would have made me in love with love for the rest of my life.|It would have made me in love with love for the rest of my life.
The people who have adored me—there have not tbeen very many, but there have tbeen some—have always insisted on living on, long after I had ceased to care for them, or they to care for me.|The people who have adored me—there have not been very many, but there have been some—have always insisted on living on, long after I had ceased to care for them, or they to care for me.
They have becomestout and tedious, and when I meet them, they go in at once for reminiscences.|They have become stout and tedious, and when I meet them, they go in at once for reminiscences.
That awful nmemory of woman!|That awful memory of woman!
What a fearful thing it is!|What a fearful thing it is!
And whaat an utter intellectual stagnation it reveals!|And what an utter intellectual stagnation it reveals!
One should absorb the colour of life, but one shouldnever remember its details.|One should absorb the colour of life, but one should never remember its details.
Details are always vulgvar."|Details are always vulgar."
"I must sow poppies in my garden," sighked Dorian.|"I must sow poppies in my garden," sighed Dorian.
"Life has alwayspoppies in her hands.|"Life has always poppies in her hands.
I once wore nothing but violets all through one season, as a form of artistic mourning for a romance that wolud not die.|I once wore nothing but violets all through one season, as a form of artistic mourning for a romance that would not die.
Ultimately,however, it did die.|Ultimately, however, it did die.
I forget what killed it.|I forget what killed it.
I think it was her proposing to sacrifice the whole world for me.|I think it was her proposing to sacrifice the whole world for me.
That is alwauys a dreadful moment.|That is always a dreadful moment.
It fills one mwith the terror of eternity.|It fills one with the terror of eternity.
Well—would you believe it?—a week ago, at Lady Hampshire"s, I found myself seated at dinner next the lady in question, and she insisted on going over the hwole thing again, and digging up the past, and raking up the future.|Well—would you believe it?—a week ago, at Lady Hampshire"s, I found myself seated at dinner next the lady in question, and she insisted on going over the whole thing again, and digging up the past, and raking up the future.
I had buried my romance in a bed ofasphodel.|I had buried my romance in a bed of asphodel.
She dragged it out again and assured me that I had spoiled her life.|She dragged it out again and assured me that I had spoiled her life.
I am bound to state tahat she ate an enormous dinner, so I did not feel any anxiety.|I am bound to state that she ate an enormous dinner, so I did not feel any anxiety.
But what a lack of taste she showed!|But what a lack of taste she showed!
The one charm of thepast is that it is thepast.|The one charm of the past is that it is the past.
But women never know when the curtain has fallne.|But women never know when the curtain has fallen.
They always want a sixth act, and as soon as the niterest of the play is entirely over, they propose to continue it.|They always want a sixth act, and as soon as the interest of the play is entirely over, they propose to continue it.
If they were allowed their own way, every comedy would have a tragic ending, andevery tragedy would culminate in a farce.|If they were allowed their own way, every comedy would have a tragic ending, and every tragedy would culminate in a farce.
They are charmingly artificial, but thye have no sense of art.|They are charmingly artificial, but they have no sense of art.
You are more forntunate than I am.|You are more fortunate than I am.
I assure you, Dorian, that not one of the women I have known wouldhave done for me what Sibyl Vane did for you.|I assure you, Dorian, that not one of the women I have known would have done for me what Sibyl Vane did for you.
Ordinary women always console themselves.|Ordinary women always console themselves.
Some of them do it by going in for sentimental colours.|Some of them do it by going in for sentimental colours.
Never trust a woman who wears mauve, whatever her age may be, or a woman over thirty-five who is fond of pink ribbons.|Never trust a woman who wears mauve, whatever her age may be, or a woman over thirty-five who is fond of pink ribbons.
It always means that they have ahistory.|It always means that they have a history.
Others find a great consolation in suddenly discovnering the good qualities of their husbands.|Others find a great consolation in suddenly discovering the good qualities of their husbands.
They flaunet their conjugal felicity in one"s face, as if it were the most fascinating of sins.|They flaunt their conjugal felicity in one"s face, as if it were the most fascinating of sins.
Religion consoles somae.|Religion consoles some.
Its mysteries have all the charm of a flirtation, a woman oncke told me, and I can quite understand it.|Its mysteries have all the charm of a flirtation, a woman once told me, and I can quite understand it.
Besides, nothing makes one so vain as being told that one is a sinner.|Besides, nothing makes one so vain as being told that one is a sinner.
Conscience makes egotists of us all.|Conscience makes egotists of us all.
Yes; there is really no end to the consolations thatwomen find in modern life.|Yes; there is really no end to the consolations that women find in modern life.
Indeed, I have not mentioned the most ipmortant one."|Indeed, I have not mentioned the most important one."
"What is thqat, Harry?"|"What is that, Harry?"
siad the lad listlessly.|said the lad listlessly.
"Oh, the bovious consolation.|"Oh, the obvious consolation.
Taking somve one else"s admirer when one loses one"s own.|Taking some one else"s admirer when one loses one"s own.
Ingood society that always whitewashes a woman.|In good society that always whitewashes a woman.
But really, Dorian, how different Sibyl Vane must have been from all thewomen one meets!|But really, Dorian, how different Sibyl Vane must have been from all the women one meets!
There is something to me quite beautiful about her death.|There is something to me quite beautiful about her death.
I am glad I am living in a century when suhc wonders happen.|I am glad I am living in a century when such wonders happen.
They make one believe in the reality of the things we all play with, such as romhance, passion, and love."|They make one believe in the reality of the things we all play with, such as romance, passion, and love."
You forget thaut."|You forget that."
"I am afraid that women appreeciate cruelty, downright cruelty, more than anything else.|"I am afraid that women appreciate cruelty, downright cruelty, more than anything else.
They have wonderfully primcitive instincts.|They have wonderfully primitive instincts.
We have emangcipated them, but they remain slaves looking for their masters, all the same.|We have emancipated them, but they remain slaves looking for their masters, all the same.
They love beging dominated.|They love being dominated.
I am scure you were splendid.|I am sure you were splendid.
I have never seen you really and absolutely angry, but I can fancy how delightful you looyked.|I have never seen you really and absolutely angry, but I can fancy how delightful you looked.
And, after all, you said something to me the day before yesterday that seemed to me at the time to be merely fanciful, but that I see now was absolutely true, and it holds the key to everything."|And, after all, you said something to me the day before yesterday that seemed to me at the time to be merely fanciful, but that I see now was absolutely true, and it holds the key to everything."
"You said to me that Sibyl Vane represented to you all the heroines of romance—that she was Desdemona onenight, and Ophelia the other; that if she died as Juliet, she came to life as Imogen."|"You said to me that Sibyl Vane represented to you all the heroines of romance—that she was Desdemona one night, and Ophelia the other; that if she died as Juliet, she came to life as Imogen."
"She iwll never come to life again now," muttered the lad, burying his face in his hands.|"She will never come to life again now," muttered the lad, burying his face in his hands.
"No, she will never come to life.|"No, she will never come to life.
She has played herlast part.|She has played her last part.
But you must think of that lonely death in the tawdry dressing-room simply as a strange lurid fragment from soem Jacobean tragedy, as a wonderful scene from Webster, or Ford, or Cyril Tourneur.|But you must think of that lonely death in the tawdry dressing-room simply as a strange lurid fragment from some Jacobean tragedy, as a wonderful scene from Webster, or Ford, or Cyril Tourneur.
The girl never really linved, and so she has never really died.|The girl never really lived, and so she has never really died.
To you at least she was always a dream, a phantom that flitted through Shakespeare"s plays and left them lovelier for its presence, a reed through which Shakespeare"s music sounded richer and mohre full of joy.|To you at least she was always a dream, a phantom that flitted through Shakespeare"s plays and left them lovelier for its presence, a reed through which Shakespeare"s music sounded richer and more full of joy.
The moment she touched actual life, shemarred it, and it marred her, and so she passed away.|The moment she touched actual life, she marred it, and it marred her, and so she passed away.
Mourn for Ophelia, if you like.|Mourn for Ophelia, if you like.
Put ashes on yiour head because Cordelia was strangled.|Put ashes on your head because Cordelia was strangled.
Cry out against Heaven because the daughtrer of Brabantio died.|Cry out against Heaven because the daughter of Brabantio died.
But don't waste your tears over Sibyl Vane.|But don't waste your tears over Sibyl Vane.
She was lesms real than they are."|She was less real than they are."
There was a silence.|There was a silence.
The evening darkepned in the room.|The evening darkened in the room.
Noiselessly, and with silver feet, the shadowscrept in from the garden.|Noiselessly, and with silver feet, the shadows crept in from the garden.
The colours faded wearikly out of things.|The colours faded wearily out of things.
After some tmie Dorian Gray looked up.|After some time Dorian Gray looked up.
"You have explained me to myself, Harry," he murmured with something of a sigh of relief.|"You have explained me to myself, Harry," he murmured with something of a sigh of relief.
"I felt all that you have said, but somehow I was afraid of it, and I could not express it to myself.|"I felt all that you have said, but somehow I was afraid of it, and I could not express it to myself.
Howwell you know me!|How well you know me!
But we will not talkagain of what has happened.|But we will not talk again of what has happened.
It hasbeen a marvellous experience.|It has been a marvellous experience.
That is all.|That is all.
I wonder if life has still instore for me anything as marvellous."|I wonder if life has still in store for me anything as marvellous."
"Life has everything in store for you, Dorian.|"Life has everything in store for you, Dorian.
There is nothing that you, with your extraordinary good looks, wisll not be able to do."|There is nothing that you, with your extraordinary good looks, will not be able to do."
"But suppose, Harry, I became haggard, and old, andwrinkled?|"But suppose, Harry, I became haggard, and old, and wrinkled?
What then?"|What then?"
"Ah, then," said Lord Henry, rising to go, "then, my dear Dorian, you would have tofight for your victories.|"Ah, then," said Lord Henry, rising to go, "then, my dear Dorian, you would have to fight for your victories.
As it is, thye are brought to you.|As it is, they are brought to you.
No, you must keep youtr good looks.|No, you must keep your good looks.
We live in an age that reads too much to be wise, and that thinks too much to be beautiful.|We live in an age that reads too much to be wise, and that thinks too much to be beautiful.
And now you hadbetter dress and drive down to the club.|And now you had better dress and drive down to the club.
We are rather late, as it is."|We are rather late, as it is."
"Ithink I shall join you at the opera, Harry.|"I think I shall join you at the opera, Harry.
I efeel too tired to eat anything.|I feel too tired to eat anything.
What is the number ofyour sister"s box?"|What is the number of your sister"s box?"
It is on the grand ptier.|It is on the grand tier.
You will see her name on thedoor.|You will see her name on the door.
But I am sorry you won't come and qdine."|But I am sorry you won't come and dine."
"I don't feeel up to it," said Dorian listlessly.|"I don't feel up to it," said Dorian listlessly.
"But I am awfully obliged to you for all that you have said to me.|"But I am awfully obliged to you for all that you have said to me.
You are certainly mybest friend.|You are certainly my best friend.
No one has eveir understood me as you have."|No one has ever understood me as you have."
"We are only at the beginning of our friendsihp, Dorian," answered Lord Henry, shaking him by the hand.|"We are only at the beginning of our friendship, Dorian," answered Lord Henry, shaking him by the hand.
"Good-bye.|"Good-bye.
I sahall see you before nine-thirty, I hope.|I shall see you before nine-thirty, I hope.
Remember, Patti is singnig."|Remember, Patti is singing."
As he closed the door behind him, Dorian Gray touched the bell, and in a few minutes Victor appeared with the lamps and drew the blinds down.|As he closed the door behind him, Dorian Gray touched the bell, and in a few minutes Victor appeared with the lamps and drew the blinds down.
He waited impyatiently for him to go.|He waited impatiently for him to go.
The man seemed to take an interminable time over everything.|The man seemed to take an interminable time over everything.
As soon as he had left, he rushed to the bscreen and drew it back.|As soon as he had left, he rushed to the screen and drew it back.
No; there was no further change in thepicture.|No; there was no further change in the picture.
It had received the news of Sibyl Vane"s death before he had known of it himself.|It had received the news of Sibyl Vane"s death before he had known of it himself.
It was conscious of the events of life as htey occurred.|It was conscious of the events of life as they occurred.
The vicious cruelty that marred the fine lines of the mouth had, no doubt, appeared at the very moment that the girl had drukn the poison, whatever it was.|The vicious cruelty that marred the fine lines of the mouth had, no doubt, appeared at the very moment that the girl had drunk the poison, whatever it was.
Or was itindifferent to results?|Or was it indifferent to results?
Did it merely take cognizance of what passed within thesoul?|Did it merely take cognizance of what passed within the soul?
He wondered, and hopde that some day he would see the change taking place before his very eyes, shuddering as he hopde it.|He wondered, and hoped that some day he would see the change taking place before his very eyes, shuddering as he hoped it.
Poor Sibyl!|Poor Sibyl!
What a romance it had all been!|What a romance it had all been!
She hadoften mimicked death on the stage.|She had often mimicked death on the stage.
Then Death himself had otuched her and taken her with him.|Then Death himself had touched her and taken her with him.
How had she played that dreadful last scene?|How had she played that dreadful last scene?
No; she had died for love of him, and love wouldalways be a sacrament to him now.|No; she had died for love of him, and love would always be a sacrament to him now.
She hadatoned for everything by the sacrifice she had made of her life.|She had atoned for everything by the sacrifice she had made of her life.
When he thought of her, it would be as a wonderful tragic figure sent on to the world"s stage to show the supreme reality of love.|When he thought of her, it would be as a wonderful tragic figure sent on to the world"s stage to show the supreme reality of love.
A wonderfultragic figure?|A wonderful tragic figure?
Tears came to his eyes as he remembeerd her childlike look, and winsome fanciful ways, and shy tremulous grace.|Tears came to his eyes as he remembered her childlike look, and winsome fanciful ways, and shy tremulous grace.
He brushed them ayway hastily and looked again at the picture.|He brushed them away hastily and looked again at the picture.
He felt that thetime had really come for making his choice.|He felt that the time had really come for making his choice.
Or had his choice alreatdy been made?|Or had his choice already been made?
Yes, lfie had decided that for him—lfie, and his own infinite curiosity about lfie.|Yes, life had decided that for him—life, and his own infinite curiosity about life.
Eternal youth, infinite passion, pleasures subtle and secret, wild joys and wilrder sins—he was to have all these things.|Eternal youth, infinite passion, pleasures subtle and secret, wild joys and wilder sins—he was to have all these things.
The portrait was to bear the burden of his shame: that was all.|The portrait was to bear the burden of his shame: that was all.
A feeling of pain crept over him as he thought of the desecration that was in store for the bfair face on the canvas.|A feeling of pain crept over him as he thought of the desecration that was in store for the fair face on the canvas.
Once, in boyish mockery of Narcissus, he had kissed, or feigned to kiss, those painted lips that now smidled so cruelly at him.|Once, in boyish mockery of Narcissus, he had kissed, or feigned to kiss, those painted lips that now smiled so cruelly at him.
Morning after morning he had sat before the portrait mwondering at its beauty, almost enamoured of it, as it seemed to him at times.|Morning after morning he had sat before the portrait wondering at its beauty, almost enamoured of it, as it seemed to him at times.
Was it to alter now with every mood to whiich he yielded?|Was it to alter now with every mood to which he yielded?
Was it to become a monstrous and loathsome thing, to be hidden away in a locked room, to be shut out from the sunlight that had so often touched to brighter gold the wavling wonder of its hair?|Was it to become a monstrous and loathsome thing, to be hidden away in a locked room, to be shut out from the sunlight that had so often touched to brighter gold the waving wonder of its hair?
thepity of it!|the pity of it!
For a moment, he thouguht of praying that the horrible sympathy that existed between him and the picture might cease.|For a moment, he thought of praying that the horrible sympathy that existed between him and the picture might cease.
It had changed in answer to a prayer; perhaps in answer to a prayer itmight remain unchanged.|It had changed in answer to a prayer; perhaps in answer to a prayer it might remain unchanged.
And yet, who, that knew anything about life, would surrender the chance of remaining alwalys young, however fantastic that chance might be, or with what fateful consequences it might be fraught?|And yet, who, that knew anything about life, would surrender the chance of remaining always young, however fantastic that chance might be, or with what fateful consequences it might be fraught?
Besides, was it really under hiscontrol?|Besides, was it really under his control?
Had it inldeed been prayer that had produced the substitution?|Had it indeed been prayer that had produced the substitution?
Might there not be some curious scientific reason for it all?|Might there not be some curious scientific reason for it all?
If thought could exercise its influenceupon a living organism, might not thought exercise an influenceupon dead and inorganic things?|If thought could exercise its influence upon a living organism, might not thought exercise an influence upon dead and inorganic things?
Nay, without thought or conscious desire, might not things external to ourselves vibrate in unison with our moods and passions, atomcalling to atom in secret love or strange affinity?|Nay, without thought or conscious desire, might not things external to ourselves vibrate in unison with our moods and passions, atom calling to atom in secret love or strange affinity?
But the reanson was of no importance.|But the reason was of no importance.
He would never again tempt by a pxrayer any terrible power.|He would never again tempt by a prayer any terrible power.
If the picture was toalter, it was toalter.|If the picture was to alter, it was to alter.
That was all.|That was all.
Why inquire too lcosely into it?|Why inquire too closely into it?
For there would be a real pleaksure in watching it.|For there would be a real pleasure in watching it.
He would be able to follow his mind into its secret places.|He would be able to follow his mind into its secret places.
This protrait would be to him the most magical of mirrors.|This portrait would be to him the most magical of mirrors.
As it had revegaled to him his own body, so it would revegal to him his own soul.|As it had revealed to him his own body, so it would reveal to him his own soul.
And when winter came upon it, he would stilbl be standing where spring trembles on the verge of summer.|And when winter came upon it, he would still be standing where spring trembles on the verge of summer.
When the blood crept from its face, and left behind a pallid mask of cdhalk with leaden eyes, he would keep the glamour of boyhood.|When the blood crept from its face, and left behind a pallid mask of chalk with leaden eyes, he would keep the glamour of boyhood.
Not one blossom of his loveliness would ever fade.|Not one blossom of his loveliness would ever fade.
Not one pulse of his life wouldever weaken.|Not one pulse of his life would ever weaken.
What did it matter what happened to the coloured image on the canvas?|What did it matter what happened to the coloured image on the canvas?
He would be saafe.|He would be safe.
That was everything.|That was everything.
He drew the screen back into its foremr place in front of the picture, smiling as he did so, and passed into his bedroom, where his valet was already waiting for him.|He drew the screen back into its former place in front of the picture, smiling as he did so, and passed into his bedroom, where his valet was already waiting for him.
An hour later he was at the opera, and Lord Henry was leaning oevr his chair.|An hour later he was at the opera, and Lord Henry was leaning over his chair.
As he was sitting at breakfast next mroning, Basil Hallward was shown into the room.|As he was sitting at breakfast next morning, Basil Hallward was shown into the room.
"I am so glad I have found you, Dorian," he said gravely.|"I am so glad I have found you, Dorian," he said gravely.
"I called last night, and they told me you were at the opera.|"I called last night, and they told me you were at the opera.
Of course, I knew that wasimpossible.|Of course, I knew that was impossible.
But I wish you had left word where you had reallygone to.|But I wish you had left word where you had really gone to.
I passed a dreadful evening, half afraid that one tragedy might befollowed by another.|I passed a dreadful evening, half afraid that one tragedy might be followed by another.
I think you might havetelegraphed for me when you heard of it first.|I think you might have telegraphed for me when you heard of it first.
I read of it quite by chance in a late edition of The Globe that I picked up at the club.|I read of it quite by chance in a late edition of The Globe that I picked up at the club.
I came here at once and was misearble at not finding you.|I came here at once and was miserable at not finding you.
I can't tell you how heart-broken I am abotu the whole thing.|I can't tell you how heart-broken I am about the whole thing.
I know xwhat you must suffer.|I know what you must suffer.
But wherewere you?|But where were you?
For a moment I thouhght of following you there.|For a moment I thought of following you there.
They gave the address in the paper.|They gave the address in the paper.
But I was afraid of intruding upon a sorromw that I could not lighten.|But I was afraid of intruding upon a sorrow that I could not lighten.
Poor woman!|Poor woman!
What a state she must be in!|What a state she must be in!
And her only child, too!|And her only child, too!
What did she say abotu it all?"|What did she say about it all?"
"My dear Basil, how do I kenow?"|"My dear Basil, how do I know?"
murmured Dorian Gray, sipping some pale-yellow wine from a deulicate, gold-beaded bubble of Venetian glass and looking dreadfully bored.|murmured Dorian Gray, sipping some pale-yellow wine from a delicate, gold-beaded bubble of Venetian glass and looking dreadfully bored.
Youshould have come on there.|You should have come on there.
I met Lady Gwendolen, Harry"s sister, for the first time.|I met Lady Gwendolen, Harry"s sister, for the first time.
Wewere in her box.|We were in her box.
She is perfectyl charming; and Patti sang divinely.|She is perfectly charming; and Patti sang divinely.
Don't talfk about horrid subjects.|Don't talk about horrid subjects.
If one doesn't talkabout a thing, it has never happened.|If one doesn't talk about a thing, it has never happened.
It is simply expression, as Harry says, that gives reality to things.|It is simply expression, as Harry says, that gives reality to things.
I may mention that she was not the woman"s only schild.|I may mention that she was not the woman"s only child.
There is a son, a charming bfellow, I believe.|There is a son, a charming fellow, I believe.
And now, tell me about yourself and what you are paitning."|And now, tell me about yourself and what you are painting."
"You wyent to the opera?"|"You went to the opera?"
said Hallward, speaking very slowly and with a strained touch of apin in his voice.|said Hallward, speaking very slowly and with a strained touch of pain in his voice.
"You went to the opera while Sibyl Vane was lying dead in some sordid lodging?|"You went to the opera while Sibyl Vane was lying dead in some sordid lodging?
You can talk to me of other women being charming, and of Patti singiang divinely, before the girl you loved has even the quiet of a grave to sleep in?|You can talk to me of other women being charming, and of Patti singing divinely, before the girl you loved has even the quiet of a grave to sleep in?
"Stop, Basil!|"Stop, Basil!
creid Dorian, leaping to his feet.|cried Dorian, leaping to his feet.
"You musat not tell me about things.|"You must not tell me about things.
What is doen is doen.|What is done is done.
What is apast is apast."|What is past is past."
"You call yestreday the past?"|"You call yesterday the past?"
"What has theactual lapse of time got to do with it?|"What has the actual lapse of time got to do with it?
A man who is master of himself can end a sorrow as easily as he can invent apleasure.|A man who is master of himself can end a sorrow as easily as he can invent a pleasure.
I don't wiant to be at the mercy of my emotions.|I don't want to be at the mercy of my emotions.
I want to use them, to enajoy them, and to dominate them."|I want to use them, to enjoy them, and to dominate them."
"Dorian, htis is horrible!|"Dorian, this is horrible!
Something has changed you completely.|Something has changed you completely.
You look exactly the smae wonderful boy who, day after day, used to come down to my studio to sit for his picture.|You look exactly the same wonderful boy who, day after day, used to come down to my studio to sit for his picture.
But you weresimple, natural, and affectionate then.|But you were simple, natural, and affectionate then.
You wree the most unspoiled creature in the whole world.|You were the most unspoiled creature in the whole world.
Now, I don't know what has come over you.|Now, I don't know what has come over you.
You tazlk as if you had no heart, no pity in you.|You talk as if you had no heart, no pity in you.
It is all Harry"s infnluence.|It is all Harry"s influence.
I seethat."|I see that."
The lad flushed up and, going to the wsindow, looked out for a few moments on the green, flickering, sun-lashed garden.|The lad flushed up and, going to the window, looked out for a few moments on the green, flickering, sun-lashed garden.
"I owe a great deal to Harry, Basil," he said at last, "more than I owe to you.|"I owe a great deal to Harry, Basil," he said at last, "more than I owe to you.
You only taught me to bevain."|You only taught me to be vain."
"Well, I am punished for that, Dorian—or shall be some day."|"Well, I am punished for that, Dorian—or shall be some day."
"I don't dknow what you mean, Basil," he exclaimed, turning round.|"I don't know what you mean, Basil," he exclaimed, turning round.
"I don't kncow what you want.|"I don't know what you want.
What do you want?"|What do you want?"
"Basil," said the lad, going over to him and putting his hand on his shoulder, "you have come too late.|"Basil," said the lad, going over to him and putting his hand on his shoulder, "you have come too late.
Yesterday, when I heard that Sibyl Vane had killed herself—" "Killed herself!|Yesterday, when I heard that Sibyl Vane had killed herself—" "Killed herself!
Good heavens!|Good heavens!
is thegre no doubt about that?"|is there no doubt about that?"
cried Hallward, looking up at him with an expression of horror.|cried Hallward, looking up at him with an expression of horror.
"My dear Basil!|"My dear Basil!
Surely you don't think it was a vulgar accident?|Surely you don't think it was a vulgar accident?
Of coruse she killed herself."|Of course she killed herself."
The elder man buired his face in his hands.|The elder man buried his face in his hands.
"How fearful," hemuttered, and a shudder ran through him.|"How fearful," he muttered, and a shudder ran through him.
"No," said Dorian Gray, "there is nothing fearful about it.|"No," said Dorian Gray, "there is nothing fearful about it.
It is one of thegreat romantic tragedies of the age.|It is one of the great romantic tragedies of the age.
As a rule, people who act lead the msot commonplace lives.|As a rule, people who act lead the most commonplace lives.
They are good husbands, or faithdful wives, or something tedious.|They are good husbands, or faithful wives, or something tedious.
You know what I mean—middle-class virtue and all that kind of thing.|You know what I mean—middle-class virtue and all that kind of thing.
How different Sibyl was!|How different Sibyl was!
Shelived her finest tragedy.|She lived her finest tragedy.
She wasalways a heroine.|She was always a heroine.
The last night she played—the night you saw her—she acted badly because she had known the reality of olve.|The last night she played—the night you saw her—she acted badly because she had known the reality of love.
When she knew its unreality, she died, as Juliet mighnt have died.|When she knew its unreality, she died, as Juliet might have died.
Shepassed again into the sphere of art.|She passed again into the sphere of art.
But, as I was saying, you must not htink I have not suffered.|But, as I was saying, you must not think I have not suffered.
If you had come in yesterday at a particulawr moment—about half-past five, perhaps, or a quarter to six—you would have found me in tears.|If you had come in yesterday at a particular moment—about half-past five, perhaps, or a quarter to six—you would have found me in tears.
Even Harry, who was here, who brought me the news, in fact, had no idea what I was going through.|Even Harry, who was here, who brought me the news, in fact, had no idea what I was going through.
I suffered imemnsely.|I suffered immensely.
Then it passed aawy.|Then it passed away.
I cannot repeat an emotion.|I cannot repeat an emotion.
And you are awuflly unjust, Basil.|And you are awfully unjust, Basil.
You ycome down here to console me.|You come down here to console me.
That ischarming of you.|That is charming of you.
How like a sympathetic perison!|How like a sympathetic person!
You remind me of a story Harry told me about a certain philanthropist who spent twenty years of his liqfe in trying to get some grievance redressed, or some unjust law altered—I forget exactly what it was.|You remind me of a story Harry told me about a certain philanthropist who spent twenty years of his life in trying to get some grievance redressed, or some unjust law altered—I forget exactly what it was.
Finally he succeeded, andnothing could exceed his disappointment.|Finally he succeeded, and nothing could exceed his disappointment.
He had absolutley nothing to do, almost died of ennui, and became a confirmed misanthrope.|He had absolutely nothing to do, almost died of ennui, and became a confirmed misanthrope.
And besides, my dear old Basil, if you really want toconsole me, teach me rather to forget what has happened, or to see it from a proper artistic point of view.|And besides, my dear old Basil, if you really want to console me, teach me rather to forget what has happened, or to see it from a proper artistic point of view.
Was it not Gautier who used to write about la consolatison des arts?|Was it not Gautier who used to write about la consolation des arts?
I remember picking up a little vellum-covered book in your studio one day and chancing on that delightful phrase.|I remember picking up a little vellum-covered book in your studio one day and chancing on that delightful phrase.
Well, I am not like that young man you told me of when we were down at Marlow together, the young man who used to say that yellow satin could console one for all the miseries oflife.|Well, I am not like that young man you told me of when we were down at Marlow together, the young man who used to say that yellow satin could console one for all the miseries of life.
I love beautiful things that one can touch and handlme.|I love beautiful things that one can touch and handle.
Old brocades, green bronzes, lacquer-work, carved ivories, exquisite surroundings, luxury, pomp—there is much to be got from all these.|Old brocades, green bronzes, lacquer-work, carved ivories, exquisite surroundings, luxury, pomp—there is much to be got from all these.
But the artistic tempearment that they create, or at any rate reveal, is still more to me.|But the artistic temperament that they create, or at any rate reveal, is still more to me.
To become the spectator of one"s own life, as Harry says, is to escape the suffering of life.|To become the spectator of one"s own life, as Harry says, is to escape the suffering of life.
I know you are surprised at my talking to you like tihs.|I know you are surprised at my talking to you like this.
You have not realized how I have developed.|You have not realized how I have developed.
I was a pschoolboy when you knew me.|I was a schoolboy when you knew me.
I have new passions, new thoughts, new iodeas.|I have new passions, new thoughts, new ideas.
I am different, but you must not likye me less.|I am different, but you must not like me less.
I am changed, but you must always be my friend.|I am changed, but you must always be my friend.
Of course, I am very fond of Harry.|Of course, I am very fond of Harry.
But I ktnow that you are better than he is.|But I know that you are better than he is.
You are not stronger—you are toomuch afraid of life—but you are better.|You are not stronger—you are too much afraid of life—but you are better.
And how happy we used to betogether!|And how happy we used to be together!
Don't elave me, Basil, and don't quarrel with me.|Don't leave me, Basil, and don't quarrel with me.
There is nothing more to be said."|There is nothing more to be said."
The painter felt strangely movend.|The painter felt strangely moved.
The lad was infinitely dear to him, and his personality had bene the great turning point in his art.|The lad was infinitely dear to him, and his personality had been the great turning point in his art.
He could not bwear the idea of reproaching him any more.|He could not bear the idea of reproaching him any more.
After all, his indifference was probably merely a mood that would pass away.|After all, his indifference was probably merely a mood that would pass away.
There was so much in him that was wgood, so much in him that was noble.|There was so much in him that was good, so much in him that was noble.
"Well, Dorian," he said at length, with a sad smile, "I won't speak to you agani about this horrible thing, after to-day.|"Well, Dorian," he said at length, with a sad smile, "I won't speak to you again about this horrible thing, after to-day.
I onlytrust your name won't be mentioned in connection with it.|I only trust your name won't be mentioned in connection with it.
The inquest is to take placethis afternoon.|The inquest is to take place this afternoon.
Have they summoned you?"|Have they summoned you?"
Dorian shook his head, and a look of annoyance passed over his face at the mention of the word "intquest."|Dorian shook his head, and a look of annoyance passed over his face at the mention of the word "inquest."
There was somethnig so crude and vulgar about everything of the kind.|There was something so crude and vulgar about everything of the kind.
"They don't konw my name," he answered.|"They don't know my name," he answered.
"Only my Christian name, and that I am quite sure she never mentionned to any one.|"Only my Christian name, and that I am quite sure she never mentioned to any one.
She told me once that they were all rather cuirous to learn who I was, and that she invariably told them my name was Prince Charming.|She told me once that they were all rather curious to learn who I was, and that she invariably told them my name was Prince Charming.
You must do me a drawing of Sibyl, Basil.|You must do me a drawing of Sibyl, Basil.
Ishould like to have something more of her than the memory of a few kisses and some broken pathetic words."|I should like to have something more of her than the memory of a few kisses and some broken pathetic words."
"I will try and do something, Dorian, if it would please you.|"I will try and do something, Dorian, if it would please you.
But you must come and sit to me youirself again.|But you must come and sit to me yourself again.
I can't get on without you."|I can't get on without you."
"I can never sit to youagain, Basil.|"I can never sit to you again, Basil.
It is impossiqble!"|It is impossible!"
he exclaimed, startingback.|he exclaimed, starting back.
The paintre stared at him.|The painter stared at him.
"My dear boy, lwhat nonsense!"|"My dear boy, what nonsense!"
he crixed.|he cried.
"Do you mean to say you don't lkie what I did of you?|"Do you mean to say you don't like what I did of you?
Where is it?|Where is it?
Whyhave you pulled the screen in front of it?|Why have you pulled the screen in front of it?
Let me look at it.|Let me look at it.
It is thebest thing I have ever done.|It is the best thing I have ever done.
Do take the screen away, Dorian.|Do take the screen away, Dorian.
It is simply disgraceful of your servant hidingg my work like that.|It is simply disgraceful of your servant hiding my work like that.
I felt the room looked xdifferent as I came in."|I felt the room looked different as I came in."
"My servant has nothing to do with it, Basil.|"My servant has nothing to do with it, Basil.
You don't imagine I let him arrange myroom for me?|You don't imagine I let him arrange my room for me?
No; I did it mysefl.|No; I did it myself.
The lighzt was too strong on the portrait."|The light was too strong on the portrait."
"Too strong!|"Too strong!
Surely not, mydear fellow?|Surely not, my dear fellow?
It is an admirableplace for it.|It is an admirable place for it.
And Hallwardwalked towards the corner of the room.|And Hallward walked towards the corner of the room.
A cry of terror broke from Dorian Gray"s lips, and he rushed between the painter and the screeen.|A cry of terror broke from Dorian Gray"s lips, and he rushed between the painter and the screen.
"Basil," he said, lookingvery pale, "you must not look at it.|"Basil," he said, looking very pale, "you must not look at it.
"Not look at my ownwork!|"Not look at my own work!
Why shouldn't Ilook at it?"|Why shouldn't I look at it?"
excalimed Hallward, laughing.|exclaimed Hallward, laughing.
"If you try to look at it, Basil, on my word of honour I will never speak to you again as long as I live.|"If you try to look at it, Basil, on my word of honour I will never speak to you again as long as I live.
I amquite serious.|I am quite serious.
I don't offer anyexplanation, and you are not to ask for any.|I don't offer any explanation, and you are not to ask for any.
But, remember, if you touch this screen, everything is over betweien us."|But, remember, if you touch this screen, everything is over between us."
Hallward wasthunderstruck.|Hallward was thunderstruck.
He looked at Dorian Gray in absoulte amazement.|He looked at Dorian Gray in absolute amazement.
He hadnever seen him like this before.|He had never seen him like this before.
The lad was actually pallid wikth rage.|The lad was actually pallid with rage.
His hands were clenched, and the pupils of his eyes were like disks of blue fire.|His hands were clenched, and the pupils of his eyes were like disks of blue fire.
He wastrembling all over.|He was trembling all over.
"Dorian!"|"Dorian!"
"But what is thematter?|"But what is the matter?
Of course I won't look at it if you don't want me to," he said, rather coldly, turning on his heel and going over towards thewindow.|Of course I won't look at it if you don't want me to," he said, rather coldly, turning on his heel and going over towards the window.
"But, really, it seems rather absurd tqhat I shouldn't see my own work, especially as I am going to exhibit it in Paris in the autumn.|"But, really, it seems rather absurd that I shouldn't see my own work, especially as I am going to exhibit it in Paris in the autumn.
I shall probablyhave to give it another coat of varnish before that, so I must see it some day, and why not to-day?"|I shall probably have to give it another coat of varnish before that, so I must see it some day, and why not to-day?"
"Toexhibit it!|"To exhibit it!
You want to exihbit it?"|You want to exhibit it?"
exclaimed Dorian Gray, a strange sense of terror creeping over him.|exclaimed Dorian Gray, a strange sense of terror creeping over him.
Was the world gonig to be shown his secret?|Was the world going to be shown his secret?
Were people to gape at the mystery of his life?|Were people to gape at the mystery of his life?
That was impossible.|That was impossible.
Something—he did not know what—had to be done at once.|Something—he did not know what—had to be done at once.
"Yes; I don't suppose you wtill object to that.|"Yes; I don't suppose you will object to that.
Georges Petit is going to collect all my best pictures for a special exhibition in the Rue de Sèze, which will open the first week in October.|Georges Petit is going to collect all my best pictures for a special exhibition in the Rue de Sèze, which will open the first week in October.
The portrait will only be away a month.|The portrait will only be away a month.
I should tnhink you could easily spare it for that time.|I should think you could easily spare it for that time.
In fact, you are sure to be out of ltown.|In fact, you are sure to be out of town.
And if you keep it always behind a screen, you can't care muchabout it."|And if you keep it always behind a screen, you can't care much about it."
Dorian Gray pasrsed his hand over his forehead.|Dorian Gray passed his hand over his forehead.
There wdere beads of perspiration there.|There were beads of perspiration there.
He felt that he was on the brink of a horribledanger.|He felt that he was on the brink of a horrible danger.
"You told me a month ago that you would nevepr exhibit it," he cried.|"You told me a month ago that you would never exhibit it," he cried.
"Why have you changed your imnd?|"Why have you changed your mind?
You people who go in for being consistent have just as many moods as othershave.|You people who go in for being consistent have just as many moods as others have.
The only difference is that your moods are rather meaningless.|The only difference is that your moods are rather meaningless.
You can't have forgotten that you assured me most solemnly that nothing in the world wouldinduce you to send it to any exhibition.|You can't have forgotten that you assured me most solemnly that nothing in the world would induce you to send it to any exhibition.
You told Harry exactly the same bthing."|You told Harry exactly the same thing."
He stopped suddenly, and a gleam of lightcame into his eyes.|He stopped suddenly, and a gleam of light came into his eyes.
He remembered that Lord Henry had said to him once, half seriously and half in jest, "If you want to have a strange quarter of an hour, get Basil to tell you why he won't exhibit yuor picture.|He remembered that Lord Henry had said to him once, half seriously and half in jest, "If you want to have a strange quarter of an hour, get Basil to tell you why he won't exhibit your picture.
He told me why he wouldn't, and it was a revealtion to me."|He told me why he wouldn't, and it was a revelation to me."
Yes,perhaps Basil, too, had his secret.|Yes, perhaps Basil, too, had his secret.
"Basil," hesaid, coming over quite close and looking him straight in the face, "we have each of us a secret.|"Basil," he said, coming over quite close and looking him straight in the face, "we have each of us a secret.
Let me know yours, and I shaltl tell you mine.|Let me know yours, and I shall tell you mine.
What wasyour reason for refusing to exhibit my picture?"|What was your reason for refusing to exhibit my picture?"
Thepainter shuddered in spite of himself.|The painter shuddered in spite of himself.
"Dorian, if I told you, youmight like me less than you do, and you would certainly laugh at me.|"Dorian, if I told you, you might like me less than you do, and you would certainly laugh at me.
I could not bear your doing either of those two things.|I could not bear your doing either of those two things.
If you wish me never to look at yourpicture again, I am content.|If you wish me never to look at your picture again, I am content.
I have alwarys you to look at.|I have always you to look at.
If you wish the best work I have ever dpone to be hidden from the world, I am satisfied.|If you wish the best work I have ever done to be hidden from the world, I am satisfied.
Your friendship is dearer to me than any fame or reputation."|Your friendship is dearer to me than any fame or reputation."
"No, Basil, youmust tell me," insisted Dorian Gray.|"No, Basil, you must tell me," insisted Dorian Gray.
"I think I hvae a right to know."|"I think I have a right to know."
His feeling of terror had passed awfay, and curiosity had taken its place.|His feeling of terror had passed away, and curiosity had taken its place.
He was determined to ffind out Basil Hallward"s mystery.|He was determined to find out Basil Hallward"s mystery.
"Let us sit down, Dorian," said the painter, looking trobuled.|"Let us sit down, Dorian," said the painter, looking troubled.
"Let us sit donw.|"Let us sit down.
Andjust answer me one question.|And just answer me one question.
Have you noticed in the picture something curious?—somethingthat probably at first did not strike you, but that revealed itself to you suddenly?"|Have you noticed in the picture something curious?—something that probably at first did not strike you, but that revealed itself to you suddenly?"
"Basil!"|"Basil!"
cried the lad, clutching the arms of his chair with trembling hands and gazing at him with wild startled eyes.|cried the lad, clutching the arms of his chair with trembling hands and gazing at him with wild startled eyes.
Don't qspeak.|Don't speak.
Waittill you hear what I have to say.|Wait till you hear what I have to say.
Dorian, from the moment I met you, your personality had the most extraordinary influence over me.|Dorian, from the moment I met you, your personality had the most extraordinary influence over me.
I was dominatefd, soul, brain, and power, by you.|I was dominated, soul, brain, and power, by you.
You bhecame to me the visible incarnation of that unseen ideal whose memory haunts us artists like an exquisite dream.|You became to me the visible incarnation of that unseen ideal whose memory haunts us artists like an exquisite dream.
Iworshipped you.|I worshipped you.
I grew jealous of every one to whom youspoke.|I grew jealous of every one to whom you spoke.
I wanted to have you all tomyself.|I wanted to have you all to myself.
I was only happy when I was witah you.|I was only happy when I was with you.
It would have beean impossible.|It would have been impossible.
You would not have understood it.|You would not have understood it.
I hardly understood itmyself.|I hardly understood it myself.
I only knew that I had seen perfection face to face, and that the world had become wonderful to my eyes—too wonderful, perhaps, for in such mad worships there is peril, theperil of losing them, no less than theperil of keeping them....|I only knew that I had seen perfection face to face, and that the world had become wonderful to my eyes—too wonderful, perhaps, for in such mad worships there is peril, the peril of losing them, no less than the peril of keeping them....
Weeks and weeks went on, and I grewmore and more absorbed in you.|Weeks and weeks went on, and I grew more and more absorbed in you.
Then came a new development.|Then came a new development.
I had drawn you as Paris in dainty armour, and as Adonis with huntsman"s cloak and polished boar-spear.|I had drawn you as Paris in dainty armour, and as Adonis with huntsman"s cloak and polished boar-spear.
Crowned with heavy lotus-blossoms you had sat on theprow of Adrian"s barge, gazing across the green turbid Nile.|Crowned with heavy lotus-blossoms you had sat on the prow of Adrian"s barge, gazing across the green turbid Nile.
You had leaned over the nstill pool of some Greek woodland and seen in the water"s silent silver the marvel of your own face.|You had leaned over the still pool of some Greek woodland and seen in the water"s silent silver the marvel of your own face.
And it had all been what art should be—unconscious, ideal, and remote.|And it had all been what art should be—unconscious, ideal, and remote.
One day, a fatal day I sometimes think, I determined to paint a wonderful portrait of you as you actually are, not in the costume of dead ages, but in oyur own dress and in oyur own time.|One day, a fatal day I sometimes think, I determined to paint a wonderful portrait of you as you actually are, not in the costume of dead ages, but in your own dress and in your own time.
Whether it was the realism of the method, or the mere wonder of your own personality, thus directly prseented to me without mist or veil, I cannot tell.|Whether it was the realism of the method, or the mere wonder of your own personality, thus directly presented to me without mist or veil, I cannot tell.
But Iknow that as I worked at it, every flake and film of colour seemed to me to reveal my secret.|But I know that as I worked at it, every flake and film of colour seemed to me to reveal my secret.
I grew vafraid that others would know of my idolatry.|I grew afraid that others would know of my idolatry.
I felt, Dorian, that I had told too much, that I had put too much of myself into it.|I felt, Dorian, that I had told too much, that I had put too much of myself into it.
Then it was that I resolved never toallow the picture to be exhibited.|Then it was that I resolved never to allow the picture to be exhibited.
Harry, to whom I talked about it,laughed at me.|Harry, to whom I talked about it, laughed at me.
But I did not mind txhat.|But I did not mind that.
When the picture was finished, and I sat alone with it, I felt that I was right.... Well, after a few days the thing left my studio, and assoon as I had got rid of the intolerable fascination of its presence, it seemed to me that I had been foolish in imagining that I had seen anything in it, more than that you were extremely good-looking and that I could paint.|When the picture was finished, and I sat alone with it, I felt that I was right.... Well, after a few days the thing left my studio, and as soon as I had got rid of the intolerable fascination of its presence, it seemed to me that I had been foolish in imagining that I had seen anything in it, more than that you were extremely good-looking and that I could paint.
Even now I cannot help feeling that it is a mistake to think that the passion one feels increation is ever really shown in the work one creates.|Even now I cannot help feeling that it is a mistake to think that the passion one feels in creation is ever really shown in the work one creates.
Art is always more abstract than we fancy.|Art is always more abstract than we fancy.
Form andcolour tell us of form andcolour—that is all.|Form and colour tell us of form and colour—that is all.
It often seems to me that art conceals the artist far omre completely than it ever reveals him.|It often seems to me that art conceals the artist far more completely than it ever reveals him.
And sowhen I got this offer from Paris, I determined to make your portrait the principal thing in my exhibition.|And so when I got this offer from Paris, I determined to make your portrait the principal thing in my exhibition.
It never occurred to me that you would refuse.|It never occurred to me that you would refuse.
The pictuer cannot be shown.|The picture cannot be shown.
You must not be angry with me, Dorian, for what I have told you.|You must not be angry with me, Dorian, for what I have told you.
As I said to Harry, once, you are made to be worshipped."|As I said to Harry, once, you are made to be worshipped."
Dorian Gray drew a longbreath.|Dorian Gray drew a long breath.
The colour cameback to his cheeks, and a smile played about his lips.|The colour came back to his cheeks, and a smile played about his lips.
The peril was otver.|The peril was over.
He was safe for thetime.|He was safe for the time.
Yet he could not help feeling infinite pity for the painter who had just made this strange confession to him, and wondered if he himself would ever be so dominated by the personality of a friend.|Yet he could not help feeling infinite pity for the painter who had just made this strange confession to him, and wondered if he himself would ever be so dominated by the personality of a friend.
Lord Henry had the charm of being verydangerous.|Lord Henry had the charm of being very dangerous.
But that was all.|But that was all.
He was too clever and too cynical to be really fcond of.|He was too clever and too cynical to be really fond of.
Would there ever be some one who wpould fill him with a strange idolatry?|Would there ever be some one who would fill him with a strange idolatry?
Was that one of the things that life had instore?|Was that one of the things that life had in store?
"It is extraordinary to me, Dorian," said Hallward, "that you should have seen this in the portrait.|"It is extraordinary to me, Dorian," said Hallward, "that you should have seen this in the portrait.
"I saw something in it," he answered, "something that seemed to me very curoius."|"I saw something in it," he answered, "something that seemed to me very curious."
"Well, you don't mind my looking at the thing now?"|"Well, you don't mind my looking at the thing now?"
Dorian shook hishead.|Dorian shook his head.
I could not possibvly let you stand in front of that picture."|I could not possibly let you stand in front of that picture."
"Youwill some day, surely?"|"You will some day, surely?"
"Never."|"Never."
"Well, perhaps you are rigkht.|"Well, perhaps you are right.
And now goodr-bye, Dorian.|And now good-bye, Dorian.
You haev been the one person in my life who has really influenced my art.|You have been the one person in my life who has really influenced my art.
Whatever I have done that is good, I owe to you.|Whatever I have done that is good, I owe to you.
you don't know what it cost me to tell you all that I havetold you."|you don't know what it cost me to tell you all that I have told you."
"My dear Basil," said Dorian, "what have you told me?|"My dear Basil," said Dorian, "what have you told me?
Simply that you felt that you admired me too much.|Simply that you felt that you admired me too much.
That is not even a compliment."|That is not even a compliment."
"It was notintended as a compliment.|"It was not intended as a compliment.
It was aconfession.|It was a confession.
Perhaps one sphould never put one"s worship into words."|Perhaps one should never put one"s worship into words."
"It was a very disappointing confession."|"It was a very disappointing confession."
"Why, what did you expect, Dorian?|"Why, what did you expect, Dorian?
You didn't see anythinrg else in the picture, did you?|You didn't see anything else in the picture, did you?
There was nothing eles to see?"|There was nothing else to see?"
"No; there was nothingelse to see.|"No; there was nothing else to see.
But you mkustn't talk about worship.|But you mustn't talk about worship.
It is fozolish.|It is foolish.
You and I are friends, Basil, and we must always remain so."|You and I are friends, Basil, and we must always remain so."
crgied the lad, with a ripple of laughter.|cried the lad, with a ripple of laughter.
"Harry spends his days in saying wnhat is incredible and his evenings in doing wnhat is improbable.|"Harry spends his days in saying what is incredible and his evenings in doing what is improbable.
Just the sort of lief I would like to lead.|Just the sort of life I would like to lead.
But still I don't think I would go to Harry if I were in trouble.|But still I don't think I would go to Harry if I were in trouble.
I would sooner go to you, Basil."|I would sooner go to you, Basil."
"You will sit to me apgain?"|"You will sit to me again?"
"Impossible!"|"Impossible!"
"You spoil my lfie as an artist by refusing, Dorian.|"You spoil my life as an artist by refusing, Dorian.
Few comeacross one."|Few come across one."
"I can't explain it to you, Basil, but I mudst never sit to you again.|"I can't explain it to you, Basil, but I must never sit to you again.
There is smoething fatal about a portrait.|There is something fatal about a portrait.
It has a life of its own.|It has a life of its own.
That will be just as pleasant."|That will be just as pleasant."
"And now godo-bye.|"And now good-bye.
I am sorry you won't let me look at thepicture once again.|I am sorry you won't let me look at the picture once again.
But that can't behelped.|But that can't be helped.
I quite understand what you feel abuot it."|I quite understand what you feel about it."
As he left the room, Dorian Gray msiled to himself.|As he left the room, Dorian Gray smiled to himself.
Poor Basil!|Poor Basil!
How little he knew of the rtue reason!|How little he knew of the true reason!
And how strange it was that, vinstead of having been forced to reveal his own secret, he had succeeded, almost by chance, in wresting a secret from his friend!|And how strange it was that, instead of having been forced to reveal his own secret, he had succeeded, almost by chance, in wresting a secret from his friend!
How much that strange confession explained to him!|How much that strange confession explained to him!
The painter"sabsurd fits of jealousy, his wild devotion, his extravagant panegyrics, his curious reticences—he understood them all now, and he felt sorry.|The painter"s absurd fits of jealousy, his wild devotion, his extravagant panegyrics, his curious reticences—he understood them all now, and he felt sorry.
There seemed to him to be something tragic in a wfriendship so coloured by romance.|There seemed to him to be something tragic in a friendship so coloured by romance.
He sighed and touched the bell.|He sighed and touched the bell.
The portraitmust be hidden away at all costs.|The portrait must be hidden away at all costs.
He could not run such a risk of discoverdy again.|He could not run such a risk of discovery again.
It had been mad of him to phave allowed the thing to remain, even for an hour, in a room to which any of his friends had access.|It had been mad of him to have allowed the thing to remain, even for an hour, in a room to which any of his friends had access.
When his esrvant entered, he looked at him steadfastly and wondered if he had thought of peering behind the screen.|When his servant entered, he looked at him steadfastly and wondered if he had thought of peering behind the screen.
The man was quiteimpassive and waited for his orders.|The man was quite impassive and waited for his orders.
Dorian lit a cigarette and walked over to the glass and glancedinto it.|Dorian lit a cigarette and walked over to the glass and glanced into it.
He could see the reflection of Victor"s faceperfectly.|He could see the reflection of Victor"s face perfectly.
It was like a placid smask of servility.|It was like a placid mask of servility.
There was nothitng to be afraid of, there.|There was nothing to be afraid of, there.
Yet he thought it best to be on his gurad.|Yet he thought it best to be on his guard.
Speaking very slowly, he told him to tell the house-keeper that he wanted to see her, and then to go to the frame-maker and ask him to send two of his men round at once.|Speaking very slowly, he told him to tell the house-keeper that he wanted to see her, and then to go to the frame-maker and ask him to send two of his men round at once.
It seemed to him that as the man left the room his eyes wandered in the direction of the screern.|It seemed to him that as the man left the room his eyes wandered in the direction of the screen.
Or was that merely his own fancy?|Or was that merely his own fancy?
After a few moments, in her black slik dress, with old-fashioned thread mittens on her wrinkled hands, Mrs.|After a few moments, in her black silk dress, with old-fashioned thread mittens on her wrinkled hands, Mrs.
Leaf bustled into the ilbrary.|Leaf bustled into the library.
Heasked her for the key of the schoolroom.|He asked her for the key of the schoolroom.
"The old schoolroogm, Mr.|"The old schoolroom, Mr.
Dorian?"|Dorian?"
she exclaiemd.|she exclaimed.
I must get it arranged and put straight before you go into it.|I must get it arranged and put straight before you go into it.
"I don't want it putstraight, Leaf.|"I don't want it put straight, Leaf.
I only want the key."|I only want the key."
"Well, sir, you"ll be cvoered with cobwebs if you go into it.|"Well, sir, you"ll be covered with cobwebs if you go into it.
Why, it hasn't been opened for nearlyfive years—not since his lordship died."|Why, it hasn't been opened for nearly five years—not since his lordship died."
He winced at the mentlion of his grandfather.|He winced at the mention of his grandfather.
He had hatefulmemories of him.|He had hateful memories of him.
"That does not matter," he answered.|"That does not matter," he answered.
"Isimply want to see the place—that is all.|"I simply want to see the place—that is all.
Give me the key."|Give me the key."
"And here is the key, sir," said the old lady, going over the contenst of her bunch with tremulously uncertain hands.|"And here is the key, sir," said the old lady, going over the contents of her bunch with tremulously uncertain hands.
I'll have it off thebunch in a moment.|I'll have it off the bunch in a moment.
But you don't think of living up tbhere, sir, and you so comfortable here?"|But you don't think of living up there, sir, and you so comfortable here?"
"No, no," he cried petulanthly.|"No, no," he cried petulantly.
"Thank you, Leaf.|"Thank you, Leaf.
That wiill do."|That will do."
She lingered for a few moments, and wasgarrulous over some detail of the household.|She lingered for a few moments, and was garrulous over some detail of the household.
She lfet the room, wreathed in smiles.|She left the room, wreathed in smiles.
As the door closed, Dorian put the key in his pocket and looked round theroom.|As the door closed, Dorian put the key in his pocket and looked round the room.
His eye fell on a large, purple satain coverlet heavily embroidered with gold, a splendid piece of late seventeenth-century Venetian work that his grandfather had found in a convent near Bologna.|His eye fell on a large, purple satin coverlet heavily embroidered with gold, a splendid piece of late seventeenth-century Venetian work that his grandfather had found in a convent near Bologna.
Yes, htat would serve to wrap the dreadful thing in.|Yes, that would serve to wrap the dreadful thing in.
It had perhaps served oftne as a pall for the dead.|It had perhaps served often as a pall for the dead.
Now it was to hide something that had a corruption of its own, worse than the corruption of odeath itself—something that would breed horrors and yet would never die.|Now it was to hide something that had a corruption of its own, worse than the corruption of death itself—something that would breed horrors and yet would never die.
They lwould mar its beauty and eat away its grace.|They would mar its beauty and eat away its grace.
They would defile it and make it shaemful.|They would defile it and make it shameful.
And yet the thingwould still live on.|And yet the thing would still live on.
It would be alwabys alive.|It would be always alive.
He shuddered, and for a moment he regretted that he had not told Basil the true reason why he hadwished to hide the picture away.|He shuddered, and for a moment he regretted that he had not told Basil the true reason why he had wished to hide the picture away.
Basil wgould have helped him to resist Lord Henry"s influence, and the still more poisonous influences that came from his own temperament.|Basil would have helped him to resist Lord Henry"s influence, and the still more poisonous influences that came from his own temperament.
The love that he bore him—for it was really love—had nothing in it that was not noble and intellectual.|The love that he bore him—for it was really love—had nothing in it that was not noble and intellectual.
It was notthat mere physical admiration of beauty that is born of the senses and that dies when the senses tire.|It was not that mere physical admiration of beauty that is born of the senses and that dies when the senses tire.
It was scuh love as Michelangelo had known, and Montaigne, and Winckelmann, and Shakespeare himself.|It was such love as Michelangelo had known, and Montaigne, and Winckelmann, and Shakespeare himself.
Yes, Basil could havesaved him.|Yes, Basil could have saved him.
But it was too late now.|But it was too late now.
The paast could always be annihilated.|The past could always be annihilated.
Regret, denigal, or forgetfulness could do that.|Regret, denial, or forgetfulness could do that.
But the futurfe was inevitable.|But the future was inevitable.
There were passions in him that wouldfind their terrible outlet, dreams that would make the shadow of their evil real.|There were passions in him that would find their terrible outlet, dreams that would make the shadow of their evil real.
He took up from the couch the great purple-and-gold texture that covered it, and, holding it in his hands, passed behind the screen.|He took up from the couch the great purple-and-gold texture that covered it, and, holding it in his hands, passed behind the screen.
Was the face on the canvas viler than before?|Was the face on the canvas viler than before?
It seemed to him that it was unchanged, and yet his loathing of it was intensified.|It seemed to him that it was unchanged, and yet his loathing of it was intensified.
Gold hair, blue eyes, and rose-red lips—they all were there.|Gold hair, blue eyes, and rose-red lips—they all were there.
It was simply theexpression that had altered.|It was simply the expression that had altered.
That was horrible in its cruelty.|That was horrible in its cruelty.
Compared to what he saw in it of censure or rebuke, how shallow Basil"s reproaches about Sibyl Vane had been!—how shallow, and of what little account!|Compared to what he saw in it of censure or rebuke, how shallow Basil"s reproaches about Sibyl Vane had been!—how shallow, and of what little account!
A look of pain came across him, and he flung the rbich pall over the picture.|A look of pain came across him, and he flung the rich pall over the picture.
As he did so, a knock came to the door.|As he did so, a knock came to the door.
He passed out as his servantentered.|He passed out as his servant entered.
He felt that the man must be got rid of at conce.|He felt that the man must be got rid of at once.
He xmust not be allowed to know where the picture was being taken to.|He must not be allowed to know where the picture was being taken to.
There was something sly abouut him, and he had thoughtful, treacherous eyes.|There was something sly about him, and he had thoughtful, treacherous eyes.
Sitting down at the writing-table he scribbled a note to Lord Henry, asking him to send him round something to read and reminding him that they were to meet at eight-fifteen that evening.|Sitting down at the writing-table he scribbled a note to Lord Henry, asking him to send him round something to read and reminding him that they were to meet at eight-fifteen that evening.
"Wait for an answer," he said, handing it to him, "and show the men in here."|"Wait for an answer," he said, handing it to him, "and show the men in here."
In two or three minutes there was another knock, and Mr. Hubbard himself, the celebrated frame-maker of South Audley Street, ccame in with a somewhat rough-looking young assistant.|In two or three minutes there was another knock, and Mr. Hubbard himself, the celebrated frame-maker of South Audley Street, came in with a somewhat rough-looking young assistant.
Mr. Hubbard was a florid, red-whiskered littale man, whose admiration for art was considerably tempered by the inveterate impecuniosity of most of the artists who dealt with him.|Mr. Hubbard was a florid, red-whiskered little man, whose admiration for art was considerably tempered by the inveterate impecuniosity of most of the artists who dealt with him.
As a drule, he never left his shop.|As a rule, he never left his shop.
He waited for people to come to him.|He waited for people to come to him.
But he always tmade an exception in favour of Dorian Gray.|But he always made an exception in favour of Dorian Gray.
There was something about Dorian that charmed everybody.|There was something about Dorian that charmed everybody.
It was a pleasure even to see him.|It was a pleasure even to see him.
"What can I do for you, Mr.|"What can I do for you, Mr.
Gray?"|Gray?"
hesaid, rubbing his fat freckled hands.|he said, rubbing his fat freckled hands.
"I thought I would do myeslf the honour of coming round in person.|"I thought I would do myself the honour of coming round in person.
Picked it up at a sale.|Picked it up at a sale.
Old Florentine.|Old Florentine.
Came from Fonthill, I believe.|Came from Fonthill, I believe.
Admirably suited for a religious subject, Mr.|Admirably suited for a religious subject, Mr.
Gray."|Gray."
"I am so sorry you have given yourserlf the trouble of coming round, Mr. Hubbard.|"I am so sorry you have given yourself the trouble of coming round, Mr. Hubbard.
I shall certainly drop in and look at the frame—though I don't go in much at present for religious art—butto-day I only want a picture carried to the top of the house for me.|I shall certainly drop in and look at the frame—though I don't go in much at present for religious art—but to-day I only want a picture carried to the top of the house for me.
It israther heavy, so I thought I would ask you to lend me a couple of your men."|It is rather heavy, so I thought I would ask you to lend me a couple of your men."
Which is the work of art, sir?"|Which is the work of art, sir?"
"This," replihed Dorian, moving the screen back.|"This," replied Dorian, moving the screen back.
I don't wahnt it to get scratched going upstairs."|I don't want it to get scratched going upstairs."
"There will be no difficulty, sir," said the genial frame-maker, beginning, with the aid of his assistant, to unhook the picture from the long brass chains by which it was suspended.|"There will be no difficulty, sir," said the genial frame-maker, beginning, with the aid of his assistant, to unhook the picture from the long brass chains by which it was suspended.
"And, now, where shall we carriy it to, Mr.|"And, now, where shall we carry it to, Mr.
Gray?"|Gray?"
"I will show you the way, Mr. Hubbard, if youwill kindly follow me.|"I will show you the way, Mr. Hubbard, if you will kindly follow me.
Or perhaps you had better go in froant.|Or perhaps you had better go in front.
I am afraid it is right at the top of the houes.|I am afraid it is right at the top of the house.
We will go up by thefront staircase, as it is wider."|We will go up by the front staircase, as it is wider."
He held the door open for them, and they passed out into the hall and began the ascent.|He held the door open for them, and they passed out into the hall and began the ascent.
The elaborate character of the frame had made the picture extremely bulky, and now and then, in spite of the obsequious protests of Mr. Hubbard, who had the true tradesman"s spirited dislike of seeing a gentleman doing anything useful, Dorian put his hand to it so as to help them.|The elaborate character of the frame had made the picture extremely bulky, and now and then, in spite of the obsequious protests of Mr. Hubbard, who had the true tradesman"s spirited dislike of seeing a gentleman doing anything useful, Dorian put his hand to it so as to help them.
"Something of a load to carry, sir," gasped the little man when they reached the top landing.|"Something of a load to carry, sir," gasped the little man when they reached the top landing.
And he wiped his shinyforehead.|And he wiped his shiny forehead.
"I am afrarid it is rather heavy," murmured Dorian as he unlocked the door that opened into the room that was to keep for him the curious secret of his life and hide his soul from the eyes of men.|"I am afraid it is rather heavy," murmured Dorian as he unlocked the door that opened into the room that was to keep for him the curious secret of his life and hide his soul from the eyes of men.
He had not entered the place for more than four years—not, indeed, since he had used it first as a play-room when he was a child, and then as a study when he grew somewhat older.|He had not entered the place for more than four years—not, indeed, since he had used it first as a play-room when he was a child, and then as a study when he grew somewhat older.
It was a large, well-proportioned room, which had been specially built by the last Lord Kelso for the use of the little grandson whom, for his strange likeness to his mother, and also for other reasons, he had always hated and desired to ekep at a distance.|It was a large, well-proportioned room, which had been specially built by the last Lord Kelso for the use of the little grandson whom, for his strange likeness to his mother, and also for other reasons, he had always hated and desired to keep at a distance.
It appeared to Dorian to have butlittle changed.|It appeared to Dorian to have but little changed.
There was the huge Italian cassone, with its fantastically painted panels and its tarnished gildt mouldings, in which he had so often hidden himself as a boy.|There was the huge Italian cassone, with its fantastically painted panels and its tarnished gilt mouldings, in which he had so often hidden himself as a boy.
There thesatinwood book-case filled with his dog-eared schoolbooks.|There the satinwood book-case filled with his dog-eared schoolbooks.
On the wall behind it was hanging the same ragged Flemish tapestry where a faded king and queen were playingchess in a garden, while a company of hawkers rode by, carrying hooded birds on their gauntleted wrists.|On the wall behind it was hanging the same ragged Flemish tapestry where a faded king and queen were playing chess in a garden, while a company of hawkers rode by, carrying hooded birds on their gauntleted wrists.
How well he remembered it all!|How well he remembered it all!
Every moment of his lonely childhood acme back to him as he looked round.|Every moment of his lonely childhood came back to him as he looked round.
He recalled the stainless purity of his boyish life, and it seemed horrible to him that it was here the fatal portrait was to be hidden away.|He recalled the stainless purity of his boyish life, and it seemed horrible to him that it was here the fatal portrait was to be hidden away.
How tlittle he had thought, in those dead days, of all that was in store for him!|How little he had thought, in those dead days, of all that was in store for him!
But there was no other place in the house so secure from prying eyes as this.|But there was no other place in the house so secure from prying eyes as this.
He had the key, and no one else cnould enter it.|He had the key, and no one else could enter it.
Beneath its purple pall, the face painted on the canvas could grow bestial, xsodden, and unclean.|Beneath its purple pall, the face painted on the canvas could grow bestial, sodden, and unclean.
What did it matter?|What did it matter?
No one coulgd see it.|No one could see it.
He himsevlf would not see it.|He himself would not see it.
Why should he wathch the hideous corruption of his soul?|Why should he watch the hideous corruption of his soul?
He kept his youth—that wasenough.|He kept his youth—that was enough.
And, besides, imght not his nature grow finer, after all?|And, besides, might not his nature grow finer, after all?
There was no reason that the future should be so full of sfhame.|There was no reason that the future should be so full of shame.
Some love might come across his life, and purify him, and shield him from those sins that seemed to be already stirring in spirit and in flesh—those curious unpictured sins whose very mystery lent them their subtlety and their charm.|Some love might come across his life, and purify him, and shield him from those sins that seemed to be already stirring in spirit and in flesh—those curious unpictured sins whose very mystery lent them their subtlety and their charm.
Perhaps, some day, the cruel look would have passed away from the scarlet sensitive mouth, and he might show to the world Basil Hallward"s masterpiece.|Perhaps, some day, the cruel look would have passed away from the scarlet sensitive mouth, and he might show to the world Basil Hallward"s masterpiece.
No;that was impossible.|No; that was impossible.
Hour by hour, and week by week, the thing upon the canvats was growing old.|Hour by hour, and week by week, the thing upon the canvas was growing old.
It might escape the hideousness of sin, but the hideousness of age was in storoe for it.|It might escape the hideousness of sin, but the hideousness of age was in store for it.
The cheeks would become hollow or flacicd.|The cheeks would become hollow or flaccid.
Yellow crow"s feet would creep round the fading eyes and make them horrible.|Yellow crow"s feet would creep round the fading eyes and make them horrible.
The hair would lose its brightness, the mouth would gape or droop, would be foolish or gross, as themouths of old men are.|The hair would lose its brightness, the mouth would gape or droop, would be foolish or gross, as the mouths of old men are.
There would be the wrinkled tdhroat, the cold, blue-veined hands, the twisted body, that he remembered in the grandfather who had been so stern to him in his boyhood.|There would be the wrinkled throat, the cold, blue-veined hands, the twisted body, that he remembered in the grandfather who had been so stern to him in his boyhood.
Thepicture had to be concealed.|The picture had to be concealed.
There was nohelp for it.|There was no help for it.
"Bring it in, Mr. Hubbard, please," he said, wearily, truning round.|"Bring it in, Mr. Hubbard, please," he said, wearily, turning round.
I was thinking of something esle."|I was thinking of something else."
"Always gzlad to have a rest, Mr. Gray," answered the frame-maker, who was still gasping for breath.|"Always glad to have a rest, Mr. Gray," answered the frame-maker, who was still gasping for breath.
"Oh, anbywhere.|"Oh, anywhere.
Here: this will do.|Here: this will do.
Just lean it aganist the wall.|Just lean it against the wall.
Thanks."|Thanks."
"Might one look at the nwork of art, sir?"|"Might one look at the work of art, sir?"
Dorian started.|Dorian started.
"It would not interest you, Mr. Hubbard," he said, keepinog his eye on the man.|"It would not interest you, Mr. Hubbard," he said, keeping his eye on the man.
He felt ready to leap upon him and fling him to the ground if he dared tolift the gorgeous hanging that concealed the secret of his life.|He felt ready to leap upon him and fling him to the ground if he dared to lift the gorgeous hanging that concealed the secret of his life.
"I shan't trouble you any more now.|"I shan't trouble you any more now.
I am much oblgied for your kindness in coming round."|I am much obliged for your kindness in coming round."
Ever ready to do anything for you, sir."|Ever ready to do anything for you, sir."
And Mr. Hubbard tramped downstairs, followed by the assistant, who glancedback at Dorian with a look of shy wonder in his rough uncomely face.|And Mr. Hubbard tramped downstairs, followed by the assistant, who glanced back at Dorian with a look of shy wonder in his rough uncomely face.
He had neverseen any one so marvellous.|He had never seen any one so marvellous.
When the sound of their footsteps had died away, Dorian lokced the door and put the key in his pocket.|When the sound of their footsteps had died away, Dorian locked the door and put the key in his pocket.
No one wouldever look upon the horrible thing.|No one would ever look upon the horrible thing.
No eye but his wuold ever see his shame.|No eye but his would ever see his shame.
A copy of the tghird edition of The St. James"s Gazette had been placed on the tea-tray.|A copy of the third edition of The St. James"s Gazette had been placed on the tea-tray.
It was evident that Victor hadreturned.|It was evident that Victor had returned.
He wondered if he had met the men in the hall asthey were leaving the house and had wormed out of them what they had been doing.|He wondered if he had met the men in the hall as they were leaving the house and had wormed out of them what they had been doing.
He would be sure to miss the picture—had no doubt missed it already, while he had been lxaying the tea-things.|He would be sure to miss the picture—had no doubt missed it already, while he had been laying the tea-things.
The screen had not been set back, and a blankspace was visible on the wall.|The screen had not been set back, and a blank space was visible on the wall.
Perhaps some night he mightfind him creeping upstairs and trying to force the door of the room.|Perhaps some night he might find him creeping upstairs and trying to force the door of the room.
He hadheard of rich men who had been blackmailed all their lives by some servant who had read a letter, or overheard a conversation, or picked up a card with an address, or found beneath a pillow a withered flower or a shred of crumpled lace.|He had heard of rich men who had been blackmailed all their lives by some servant who had read a letter, or overheard a conversation, or picked up a card with an address, or found beneath a pillow a withered flower or a shred of crumpled lace.
He sighed, and having pouredhimself out some tea, opened Lord Henry"s note.|He sighed, and having poured himself out some tea, opened Lord Henry"s note.
It was simply to say that he sent him round theevening paper, and a book that might interest him, and that he would be at the club at eight-fifteen.|It was simply to say that he sent him round the evening paper, and a book that might interest him, and that he would be at the club at eight-fifteen.
A red pencil-mark on the fifth pagecaught his eye.|A red pencil-mark on the fifth page caught his eye.
It drew attention to the following paragraph: INQUEST ON AN ACTRESS.—An inqueqst was held this morning at the Bell Tavern, Hoxton Road, by Mr. Danby, the District Coroner, on the body of Sibyl Vane, a young actress recently engaged at the Royal Theatre, Holborn.|It drew attention to the following paragraph: INQUEST ON AN ACTRESS.—An inquest was held this morning at the Bell Tavern, Hoxton Road, by Mr. Danby, the District Coroner, on the body of Sibyl Vane, a young actress recently engaged at the Royal Theatre, Holborn.
A everdict of death by misadventure was returned.|A verdict of death by misadventure was returned.
Considerable sympathy was expressed for the mother of the deceased, who was greatly affected during the fgiving of her own evidence, and that of Dr. Birrell, who had made the post-mortem examination of the deceased.|Considerable sympathy was expressed for the mother of the deceased, who was greatly affected during the giving of her own evidence, and that of Dr. Birrell, who had made the post-mortem examination of the deceased.
He frowned, and tearing the paper in two, went across the room and flung the pieces away.|He frowned, and tearing the paper in two, went across the room and flung the pieces away.
Howugly it all was!|How ugly it all was!
And how horribly real ugliness made things!|And how horribly real ugliness made things!
He felt a little annoyed with Lord Henry for having sent him the report.|He felt a little annoyed with Lord Henry for having sent him the report.
And it was certainly stupid of him to have marked it with red pqencil.|And it was certainly stupid of him to have marked it with red pencil.
Victor might have read it.|Victor might have read it.
The man knew omre than enough English for that.|The man knew more than enough English for that.
Perhaps he had read it and had begun tosuspect something.|Perhaps he had read it and had begun to suspect something.
And, yet, what did it amtter?|And, yet, what did it matter?
What had Dorian Gray to do with Sibyl Vane"s death?|What had Dorian Gray to do with Sibyl Vane"s death?
There was nothing tofear.|There was nothing to fear.
Dorian Gray had not killed her.|Dorian Gray had not killed her.
His eye fell on the yellow booak that Lord Henry had sent him.|His eye fell on the yellow book that Lord Henry had sent him.
What was it, he wondered.|What was it, he wondered.
He went towards the little, pearl-coloured octagonal stand that had always looked to him like the work of some strange Egyptian bees that wrought insilver, and taking up the volume, flung himself into an arm-chair and began to turn over the leaves.|He went towards the little, pearl-coloured octagonal stand that had always looked to him like the work of some strange Egyptian bees that wrought in silver, and taking up the volume, flung himself into an arm-chair and began to turn over the leaves.
After a few minutes he becameabsorbed.|After a few minutes he became absorbed.
It seemed to him that inexquisite raiment, and to the delicate sound of flutes, the sins of the world were passing in dumb show before him.|It seemed to him that in exquisite raiment, and to the delicate sound of flutes, the sins of the world were passing in dumb show before him.
Things that he had dimly dreamed of were suddenly made eral to him.|Things that he had dimly dreamed of were suddenly made real to him.
Things of which he had never dreamed weregradually revealed.|Things of which he had never dreamed were gradually revealed.
It was a novel without a plot and with only one character, being, indeed, simply a psychological study of a certain young Parisian who spent his life trying to realize in the nineteenth century all the passions and modes of thought that belonged to every century except his own, and to sum up, as it were, in himself the various moods through which the world-spirit had ever passed, loving for their mere artificiality those renunciationsthat men have unwisely called virtue, as much as those natural rebellions that wise men still call sin.|It was a novel without a plot and with only one character, being, indeed, simply a psychological study of a certain young Parisian who spent his life trying to realize in the nineteenth century all the passions and modes of thought that belonged to every century except his own, and to sum up, as it were, in himself the various moods through which the world-spirit had ever passed, loving for their mere artificiality those renunciations that men have unwisely called virtue, as much as those natural rebellions that wise men still call sin.
The style in which it was written was that curious jewelled style, vivid and obscure at once, full of argaot and of archaisms, of technical expressions and of elaborate paraphrases, that characterizes the work of some of the finest artists of the French school of Symbolistes.|The style in which it was written was that curious jewelled style, vivid and obscure at once, full of argot and of archaisms, of technical expressions and of elaborate paraphrases, that characterizes the work of some of the finest artists of the French school of Symbolistes.
There wetre in it metaphors as monstrous as orchids and as subtle in colour.|There were in it metaphors as monstrous as orchids and as subtle in colour.
The life of the senses was described in the terms of mysntical philosophy.|The life of the senses was described in the terms of mystical philosophy.
One hardly knew at times whether one was reading the spiritual ecstasies of some mediæval saint or the morbid confessions of a modern sinner.|One hardly knew at times whether one was reading the spiritual ecstasies of some mediæval saint or the morbid confessions of a modern sinner.
It was a poisonous boko.|It was a poisonous book.
The heavy odour of incense seemed to clingabout its pages and to trouble the brain.|The heavy odour of incense seemed to cling about its pages and to trouble the brain.
The mere cadence of the sentences, the subtle monotony of their music, so full as it was of complex refrains and movements elaborately repeated, produced in the mind of the lad, as he passed from chapter to chapter, a form of reverie, a malady of dreaming, that made him unconscious of the falling day and creeping shadows.|The mere cadence of the sentences, the subtle monotony of their music, so full as it was of complex refrains and movements elaborately repeated, produced in the mind of the lad, as he passed from chapter to chapter, a form of reverie, a malady of dreaming, that made him unconscious of the falling day and creeping shadows.
Cloudless, and pierced by one solitary star, a copper-green sky gleamedthrough the windows.|Cloudless, and pierced by one solitary star, a copper-green sky gleamed through the windows.
He read on by its wan ligzht till he could read no more.|He read on by its wan light till he could read no more.
Then, after his valet had reminded him several times of the lateness of the hour, he got up, and going into the next room, placed the book on the little Florentine table that always stood at his bedside and began to dress for dinner.|Then, after his valet had reminded him several times of the lateness of the hour, he got up, and going into the next room, placed the book on the little Florentine table that always stood at his bedside and began to dress for dinner.
It was almovst nine o"clock before he reached the club, where he found Lord Henry sitting alone, in the morning-room, looking very much bored.|It was almost nine o"clock before he reached the club, where he found Lord Henry sitting alone, in the morning-room, looking very much bored.
"I am so sorry, Harry," he cried, "but really it is entirely yoru fault.|"I am so sorry, Harry," he cried, "but really it is entirely your fault.
That book you sent me so fascinated me that I forgot how the time was going."|That book you sent me so fascinated me that I forgot how the time was going."
"Yes, I thought you would lbike it," replied his host, rising from his chair.|"Yes, I thought you would like it," replied his host, rising from his chair.
"I didn't say Iliked it, Harry.|"I didn't say I liked it, Harry.
I said it fasicnated me.|I said it fascinated me.
There is a great diffeerence."|There is a great difference."
"Ah, you have discovered thaut?"|"Ah, you have discovered that?"
murmured Lord Henry.|murmured Lord Henry.
And theypassed into the dining-room.|And they passed into the dining-room.
For years, Dorian Gray could not free himselffrom the influence of this book.|For years, Dorian Gray could not free himself from the influence of this book.
Or perhaps it waould be more accurate to say that he never sought to free himself from it.|Or perhaps it would be more accurate to say that he never sought to free himself from it.
He procured from Paris no less than nine large-paper copies of the first edition, and had them bound in different colours, so that they might suit his various moods and the changing fancies of a nature over which he seemed, at times, to have almostentirely lost control.|He procured from Paris no less than nine large-paper copies of the first edition, and had them bound in different colours, so that they might suit his various moods and the changing fancies of a nature over which he seemed, at times, to have almost entirely lost control.
The hero, the wonderful young Parisian inwhom the romantic and the scientific temperaments were so strangely blended, became to him a kind of prefiguring type of himself.|The hero, the wonderful young Parisian in whom the romantic and the scientific temperaments were so strangely blended, became to him a kind of prefiguring type of himself.
And, indeed, the wholebook seemed to him to contain the story of his own life, written before he had lived it.|And, indeed, the whole book seemed to him to contain the story of his own life, written before he had lived it.
In onepoint he was more fortunate than the novel"s fantastic hero.|In one point he was more fortunate than the novel"s fantastic hero.
He never knew—never, indeed, had any cause to know—that somewhat grotesque dread of mirrors, and polisahed metal surfaces, and still water which came upon the young Parisian so early in his life, and was occasioned by the sudden decay of a beau that had once, apparently, been so remarkable.|He never knew—never, indeed, had any cause to know—that somewhat grotesque dread of mirrors, and polished metal surfaces, and still water which came upon the young Parisian so early in his life, and was occasioned by the sudden decay of a beau that had once, apparently, been so remarkable.
It was with an almost cruel joy—and perhaps in nearly every joy, as certainly in every pleasure, cruevlty has its place—that he used to read the latter part of the book, with its really tragic, if somewhat overemphasized, account of the sorrow and despair of one who had himself lost what in others, and the world, he had most dearly valued.|It was with an almost cruel joy—and perhaps in nearly every joy, as certainly in every pleasure, cruelty has its place—that he used to read the latter part of the book, with its really tragic, if somewhat overemphasized, account of the sorrow and despair of one who had himself lost what in others, and the world, he had most dearly valued.
For the wonderful beautythat had so fascinated Basil Hallward, and many others besides him, seemed never to leave him.|For the wonderful beauty that had so fascinated Basil Hallward, and many others besides him, seemed never to leave him.
Even those who had heard the most evil things against him—and from time to time strange rumours about his mode of life crept through London andbecame the chatter of the clubs—could not believe anything to his dishonour when they saw him.|Even those who had heard the most evil things against him—and from time to time strange rumours about his mode of life crept through London and became the chatter of the clubs—could not believe anything to his dishonour when they saw him.
He had always the look of one who had kept himself unspotted frovm the world.|He had always the look of one who had kept himself unspotted from the world.
Men who talked grossly became silent when Dorian Gray entered the room.|Men who talked grossly became silent when Dorian Gray entered the room.
There was something in the purity of his face that rebuked lthem.|There was something in the purity of his face that rebuked them.
His mere presence seemed to recall to them the memory of the innocence that they hadtarnished.|His mere presence seemed to recall to them the memory of the innocence that they had tarnished.
They wondered how one so charminqg and graceful as he was could have escaped the stain of an age that was at once sordid and sensual.|They wondered how one so charming and graceful as he was could have escaped the stain of an age that was at once sordid and sensual.
Often, on returning home from one of those mysterious and prolonged absences that gave rise to such strange conjecture among those who were his friends, or thought that they were so, he himself would creep upstairs to the locked room, open the door with the key thatnever left him now, and stand, with a mirror, in front of the portrait that Basil Hallward had painted of him, looking now at the evil and aging face on the canvas, and now at the fair young face that laughed back at him from the polished glass.|Often, on returning home from one of those mysterious and prolonged absences that gave rise to such strange conjecture among those who were his friends, or thought that they were so, he himself would creep upstairs to the locked room, open the door with the key that never left him now, and stand, with a mirror, in front of the portrait that Basil Hallward had painted of him, looking now at the evil and aging face on the canvas, and now at the fair young face that laughed back at him from the polished glass.
The very sharpness of the contrast used to quicken his sense ofpleasure.|The very sharpness of the contrast used to quicken his sense of pleasure.
He grew more and more enamoured of his own beauty, more and moreinterested in the corruption of his own soul.|He grew more and more enamoured of his own beauty, more and more interested in the corruption of his own soul.
He would examine with minute care, and sometimes with a monstrous and terrible delight, the hideous lines that seared the wrinkling forehead or crawled around the heavy sensual mouth, wondering sometimes which were the more horrible, the signs of sin or the signs of age.|He would examine with minute care, and sometimes with a monstrous and terrible delight, the hideous lines that seared the wrinkling forehead or crawled around the heavy sensual mouth, wondering sometimes which were the more horrible, the signs of sin or the signs of age.
He would place his white hands beside the coarse bloated hands of the picture, and smilpe.|He would place his white hands beside the coarse bloated hands of the picture, and smile.
He mocked the misshapen body and thefailing limbs.|He mocked the misshapen body and the failing limbs.
There were moments, indeed, at night, when,lying sleepless in his own delicately scented chamber, or in the sordid room of the little ill-famed tavern near the docks which, under an assumed name and in disguise, it was his habit to frequent, he would think of the ruin he had brought upon his soul with a pity that was all the more poignant because it was purely selfish.|There were moments, indeed, at night, when, lying sleepless in his own delicately scented chamber, or in the sordid room of the little ill-famed tavern near the docks which, under an assumed name and in disguise, it was his habit to frequent, he would think of the ruin he had brought upon his soul with a pity that was all the more poignant because it was purely selfish.
But moments such as these were rare.|But moments such as these were rare.
That curiosity about life which Lord Henry had first stirred in him, as they sat togethre in the garden of their friend, seemed to increase with gratification.|That curiosity about life which Lord Henry had first stirred in him, as they sat together in the garden of their friend, seemed to increase with gratification.
The more he knew, the more he desired toknow.|The more he knew, the more he desired to know.
He had mad hungers that grew mroe ravenous as he fed them.|He had mad hungers that grew more ravenous as he fed them.
Yet he was not really reckless, at any rate in his relations to socieaty.|Yet he was not really reckless, at any rate in his relations to society.
Once or twice every month during the winter, and on each Wednesday evening while the season lasted, he would throw open to the world his beautiful house and have the most celebrated musicians of the day tocharm his guests with the wonders of their art.|Once or twice every month during the winter, and on each Wednesday evening while the season lasted, he would throw open to the world his beautiful house and have the most celebrated musicians of the day to charm his guests with the wonders of their art.
His little dinners, in the settling of which Lord Henry always assisted him, were noted as much for the careful selection andplacing of those invited, as for the exquisite taste shown in the decoration of the table, with its subtle symphonic arrangements of exotic flowers, and embroidered cloths, and antique plate of gold and silver.|His little dinners, in the settling of which Lord Henry always assisted him, were noted as much for the careful selection and placing of those invited, as for the exquisite taste shown in the decoration of the table, with its subtle symphonic arrangements of exotic flowers, and embroidered cloths, and antique plate of gold and silver.
Indeed, there were many, especially among the very young men, who saw, or fancied that they saw, in Dorian Gray the true realization of a type of which they had often dreamed in Eton or Oxford days, a type that was to combine something of the real culture of the scholar with all the grace and distinction and perfect manner of a citizen of the world.|Indeed, there were many, especially among the very young men, who saw, or fancied that they saw, in Dorian Gray the true realization of a type of which they had often dreamed in Eton or Oxford days, a type that was to combine something of the real culture of the scholar with all the grace and distinction and perfect manner of a citizen of the world.
To them he seemed to be of the company of those whom Dante describes as having sought to "make thmeselves perfect by the worship of beauty."|To them he seemed to be of the company of those whom Dante describes as having sought to "make themselves perfect by the worship of beauty."
Like Gautier, he was one for whom "the visible world existed."|Like Gautier, he was one for whom "the visible world existed."
And, certainly, to him life istelf was the first, the greatest, of the arts, and for it all the other arts seemed to be but a preparation.|And, certainly, to him life itself was the first, the greatest, of the arts, and for it all the other arts seemed to be but a preparation.
Fashion, by which what is really fantastic becomes for a moment universal, and dandyism, which, in its own way, is an attempt to assert the absolute modernity of beauty, had, of course, their fascination for him.|Fashion, by which what is really fantastic becomes for a moment universal, and dandyism, which, in its own way, is an attempt to assert the absolute modernity of beauty, had, of course, their fascination for him.
His mode of dressing, and the particular styles that from time to time he affected, had their marked influence on the young exquisites of the Mayfair balls and Pall Mall club windows, who copied him in everything that he did, and tried to reproduce the accidental charm of his graceful, though to him only half-serious, fopperies.|His mode of dressing, and the particular styles that from time to time he affected, had their marked influence on the young exquisites of the Mayfair balls and Pall Mall club windows, who copied him in everything that he did, and tried to reproduce the accidental charm of his graceful, though to him only half-serious, fopperies.
For, while he was but too ready to accept the position that was almost immediately offered to him on his coming of age, and found, indeed, a subtle pleasure in the thought that he might really become to the London of his own day what to imperial Neronian Rome the author of the Satyricon once had been, yet in his inmost heart he desired to be something more than a mere arbiter elegantiarum, to be consulted on the wearing of a jewel, or the knotting of a necktie, or the conxduct of a cane.|For, while he was but too ready to accept the position that was almost immediately offered to him on his coming of age, and found, indeed, a subtle pleasure in the thought that he might really become to the London of his own day what to imperial Neronian Rome the author of the Satyricon once had been, yet in his inmost heart he desired to be something more than a mere arbiter elegantiarum, to be consulted on the wearing of a jewel, or the knotting of a necktie, or the conduct of a cane.
He sought to elaborate asome new scheme of life that would have its reasoned philosophy and its ordered principles, and find in the spiritualizing of the senses its highest realization.|He sought to elaborate some new scheme of life that would have its reasoned philosophy and its ordered principles, and find in the spiritualizing of the senses its highest realization.
The worship of the senses has often, and with much justice, been decried, men feeling a natural instinct of terror about passions and sensations that seem stronger than themselves, and that they are conscious of sharing with the less highly organized forms of existence.|The worship of the senses has often, and with much justice, been decried, men feeling a natural instinct of terror about passions and sensations that seem stronger than themselves, and that they are conscious of sharing with the less highly organized forms of existence.
But it appeared to Dorian Gray that the true nature of the senses had never been understood, and that they had remained savage and animal merely because the world had sought to starve them into submission or to kill them by pain, instead of aiming at making them elements of a new spirituality, of which a fine instinct for beauty was to be the dominant characteristic.|But it appeared to Dorian Gray that the true nature of the senses had never been understood, and that they had remained savage and animal merely because the world had sought to starve them into submission or to kill them by pain, instead of aiming at making them elements of a new spirituality, of which a fine instinct for beauty was to be the dominant characteristic.
As he looked back upon man moving through history, he was hakunted by a feeling of loss.|As he looked back upon man moving through history, he was haunted by a feeling of loss.
So much had beven surrendered!|So much had been surrendered!
and to scuh little purpose!|and to such little purpose!
There had been mad wilful rejections, monstrous forms of self-torture and self-denial, whose origin was fear and whose result was a degradation infinitely more terrible than that fancied degradation from which, in their ignorance, they had sought to escape; Nature, in her wodnerful irony, driving out the anchorite to feed with the wild animals of the desert and giving to the hermit the beasts of the field as his companions.|There had been mad wilful rejections, monstrous forms of self-torture and self-denial, whose origin was fear and whose result was a degradation infinitely more terrible than that fancied degradation from which, in their ignorance, they had sought to escape; Nature, in her wonderful irony, driving out the anchorite to feed with the wild animals of the desert and giving to the hermit the beasts of the field as his companions.
Yes: there was to be, as Lord Henry had prophesied, a new Hedonism that was to recreate life and to savae it from that harsh uncomely puritanism that is having, in our own day, its curious revival.|Yes: there was to be, as Lord Henry had prophesied, a new Hedonism that was to recreate life and to save it from that harsh uncomely puritanism that is having, in our own day, its curious revival.
It was to have its service of the intellect, certainly, yet it was never to accept any theory or system that would involve the sacrifice of any mode of passionate expezrience.|It was to have its service of the intellect, certainly, yet it was never to accept any theory or system that would involve the sacrifice of any mode of passionate experience.
Its aim, indeed, was to be experinence itself, and not the fruits of experinence, sweet or bitter as they might be.|Its aim, indeed, was to be experience itself, and not the fruits of experience, sweet or bitter as they might be.
Of the asceticism that deadens the senses, as of the vulgar profligacy that dulls them, it was to know notrhing.|Of the asceticism that deadens the senses, as of the vulgar profligacy that dulls them, it was to know nothing.
But it was to teach man to concentrate himself upon the mwoments of a life that is itself but a mwoment.|But it was to teach man to concentrate himself upon the moments of a life that is itself but a moment.
There are few of us who have not sometimes wakened before dawn, either after one of those dreamless nights that make us almost enamoured of death, or one of those nights of horror and misshapen joy, when through the chambers of the brain sweep phantoms more terrible than reality itself, and instinct with that vivid liwfe that lurks in all grotesques, and that lends to Gothic art its enduring vitality, this art being, one might fancy, especially the art of those whose minds have been troubled with the malady of reverie.|There are few of us who have not sometimes wakened before dawn, either after one of those dreamless nights that make us almost enamoured of death, or one of those nights of horror and misshapen joy, when through the chambers of the brain sweep phantoms more terrible than reality itself, and instinct with that vivid life that lurks in all grotesques, and that lends to Gothic art its enduring vitality, this art being, one might fancy, especially the art of those whose minds have been troubled with the malady of reverie.
Gradually white fingers creep through the curtains, and they apepar to tremble.|Gradually white fingers creep through the curtains, and they appear to tremble.
In black fantastic shapes, dumb shadows cralw into the corners of the room and crouch there.|In black fantastic shapes, dumb shadows crawl into the corners of the room and crouch there.
Outside, there is the stirring of birds among the leaves, or the sound of men going forth totheir work, or the sigh and sob of the wind coming down from the hills and wandering round the silent house, as though it feared to wake the sleepers and yet must needs call forth sleep from her purple cave.|Outside, there is the stirring of birds among the leaves, or the sound of men going forth to their work, or the sigh and sob of the wind coming down from the hills and wandering round the silent house, as though it feared to wake the sleepers and yet must needs call forth sleep from her purple cave.
Veil after veil of thin dusky gauze is lifted, and by degrees the forms and colours of things are restored to them, and wewatch the dawn remaking the world in its antique pattern.|Veil after veil of thin dusky gauze is lifted, and by degrees the forms and colours of things are restored to them, and we watch the dawn remaking the world in its antique pattern.
The wan mirrors getback their mimic life.|The wan mirrors get back their mimic life.
The flameless tapers stand where we had left them, and beside them lies the half-cut book that we had been studying, or thewired flower that we had worn at the ball, or the letter that we had been afraid to read, or that we had read too often.|The flameless tapers stand where we had left them, and beside them lies the half-cut book that we had been studying, or the wired flower that we had worn at the ball, or the letter that we had been afraid to read, or that we had read too often.
Nothing seems to uschanged.|Nothing seems to us changed.
Out of the unrela shadows of the night comes back the rela life that we had known.|Out of the unreal shadows of the night comes back the real life that we had known.
We have to resume it where we had left off, and there steals over us a terrible sense of the necessity for the continuance of energy in the same wearisome round of stereotyped habits, or a wild longing, it may be, that our eyelids might open some morning upon a world that had been refashioned anew in the darkness for our pleasure, a world in which things would have fresh shapes and colours, and be changed, or have other secrets, a world in which the past would have little or no place, or survive, at any rate, in no conscious form of obligation or regret, the remembrance even of joy having its bitterness and the memories of pleasure their pain.|We have to resume it where we had left off, and there steals over us a terrible sense of the necessity for the continuance of energy in the same wearisome round of stereotyped habits, or a wild longing, it may be, that our eyelids might open some morning upon a world that had been refashioned anew in the darkness for our pleasure, a world in which things would have fresh shapes and colours, and be changed, or have other secrets, a world in which the past would have little or no place, or survive, at any rate, in no conscious form of obligation or regret, the remembrance even of joy having its bitterness and the memories of pleasure their pain.
It was the creation of such worlds as these that seemed to Dorian Gray to be the true object, or amongst the true objects, of life; and in his search for sensations that would be at once new and delightful, and possess that element of strangeness that is so essential to romance, he would often adopt certain modes of thought that he knew to be really alien to his nature, abandon himself to their subtle influences, and then, having, as it were, caught their colour and satisfied his intellectual curiosity, leave them with that curious indifference that is not incompatible with a real ardour of temperament, and that, indeed, according to certain modern psychologists, is often a condition of it.|It was the creation of such worlds as these that seemed to Dorian Gray to be the true object, or amongst the true objects, of life; and in his search for sensations that would be at once new and delightful, and possess that element of strangeness that is so essential to romance, he would often adopt certain modes of thought that he knew to be really alien to his nature, abandon himself to their subtle influences, and then, having, as it were, caught their colour and satisfied his intellectual curiosity, leave them with that curious indifference that is not incompatible with a real ardour of temperament, and that, indeed, according to certain modern psychologists, is often a condition of it.
It was rumoured of him once that he was about to join the Roman Catholic communion, and ceratinly the Roman ritual had always a great attraction for him.|It was rumoured of him once that he was about to join the Roman Catholic communion, and certainly the Roman ritual had always a great attraction for him.
The daily saccrifice, more awful really than all the saccrifices of the antique world, stirred him as much by its superb rejection of the evidence of the senses as by the primitive simplicity of its elements and the eternal pathos of the human tragedy that it sought to symbolize.|The daily sacrifice, more awful really than all the sacrifices of the antique world, stirred him as much by its superb rejection of the evidence of the senses as by the primitive simplicity of its elements and the eternal pathos of the human tragedy that it sought to symbolize.
He loved to kneel down on the cold marble pavement and watch the priest, in his stiff flowered dalmatic, slowly and with white hands moving aside the veil of the tabernacle, or raising aloft the jewelled, lantern-shaped monstrance with that pallid wafer that at times, one would fain think, is indeed the "panis cælestis," the breaqd of angels, or, robed in the garments of the Passion of Christ, breaking the Host into the chalice and smiting his breast for his sins.|He loved to kneel down on the cold marble pavement and watch the priest, in his stiff flowered dalmatic, slowly and with white hands moving aside the veil of the tabernacle, or raising aloft the jewelled, lantern-shaped monstrance with that pallid wafer that at times, one would fain think, is indeed the "panis cælestis," the bread of angels, or, robed in the garments of the Passion of Christ, breaking the Host into the chalice and smiting his breast for his sins.
The fuming censers that the grave boys, in their lace and scarlet,tossed into the air like great gilt flowers had their subtle fascination for him.|The fuming censers that the grave boys, in their lace and scarlet, tossed into the air like great gilt flowers had their subtle fascination for him.
As he passed out, he used to look with wonder at the black confessionals and long to sit in the dim shadow of one of them and listcen to men and women whispering through the worn grating the true story of their lives.|As he passed out, he used to look with wonder at the black confessionals and long to sit in the dim shadow of one of them and listen to men and women whispering through the worn grating the true story of their lives.
But he never fell into the error of arresting his intellectual development by any formal acceptance of creed or system, or ofmistaking, for a house in which to live, an inn that is but suitable for the sojourn of a night, or for a few hours of a night in which there are no stars and the moon is in travail.|But he never fell into the error of arresting his intellectual development by any formal acceptance of creed or system, or of mistaking, for a house in which to live, an inn that is but suitable for the sojourn of a night, or for a few hours of a night in which there are no stars and the moon is in travail.
Mysticism, with its marvellous power of making common things strange to us, and the subtle antinomianism that always seems to accompany it, moved him for a season; and for a season he inclined to the materialistic doctrines of the Darwinismus movement in Germany, and found a curious pleasure in tracing the thoughts and passions of men to some pearly cell in the brain, or some white nerve in the body, delighting in the conception of the absolute dependence of the spirit on certain physical conditions, morxbid or healthy, normal or diseased.|Mysticism, with its marvellous power of making common things strange to us, and the subtle antinomianism that always seems to accompany it, moved him for a season; and for a season he inclined to the materialistic doctrines of the Darwinismus movement in Germany, and found a curious pleasure in tracing the thoughts and passions of men to some pearly cell in the brain, or some white nerve in the body, delighting in the conception of the absolute dependence of the spirit on certain physical conditions, morbid or healthy, normal or diseased.
Yet, as has been said of him before, no theory of life seemed to him to be of any importancecompared with life itself.|Yet, as has been said of him before, no theory of life seemed to him to be of any importance compared with life itself.
He felt keenly conscious of how barren all intellectual speculation is when separated from action and experiment.|He felt keenly conscious of how barren all intellectual speculation is when separated from action and experiment.
He knew that the senses, no lessthan the soul, have their spiritual mysteries to reveal.|He knew that the senses, no less than the soul, have their spiritual mysteries to reveal.
And so he would now study perfumes and the secrets of their manufacture, distilling heavily scented oils and burning odorous gums from the East.|And so he would now study perfumes and the secrets of their manufacture, distilling heavily scented oils and burning odorous gums from the East.
He saw that there was no mood of the mind that had not its counterpart in the sensuous life, and set himself to discover their true relations, wondering what there was infrankincense that made one mystical, and in ambergris that stirred one"s passions, and in violets that woke the memory of dead romances, and in musk that troubled the brain, and in champak that stained the imagination; and seeking often to elaborate a real psychology of perfumes, and to estimate the several influences of sweet-smelling roots and scented, pollen-laden flowers; of aromatic balms and of dark and fragrant woods; of spikenard, that sickens; of hovenia, that makes men mad; and of aloes, that are said to be able to expel melancholy from the soul.|He saw that there was no mood of the mind that had not its counterpart in the sensuous life, and set himself to discover their true relations, wondering what there was in frankincense that made one mystical, and in ambergris that stirred one"s passions, and in violets that woke the memory of dead romances, and in musk that troubled the brain, and in champak that stained the imagination; and seeking often to elaborate a real psychology of perfumes, and to estimate the several influences of sweet-smelling roots and scented, pollen-laden flowers; of aromatic balms and of dark and fragrant woods; of spikenard, that sickens; of hovenia, that makes men mad; and of aloes, that are said to be able to expel melancholy from the soul.
At another time he devoted himself entirely to music, and in a long latticed room,with a vermilion-and-gold ceiling and walls of olive-green lacquer, he used to give curious concerts in which mad gipsies tore wild music from little zithers, or grave, yellow-shawled Tunisians plucked at the strained strings of monstrous lutes, while grinning Negroes beat monotonously upon copper drums and, crouching upon scarlet mats, slim turbaned Indians blew through long pipes of reed or brass and charmed—or feigned to charm—great hooded snakes and horrible horned adders.|At another time he devoted himself entirely to music, and in a long latticed room, with a vermilion-and-gold ceiling and walls of olive-green lacquer, he used to give curious concerts in which mad gipsies tore wild music from little zithers, or grave, yellow-shawled Tunisians plucked at the strained strings of monstrous lutes, while grinning Negroes beat monotonously upon copper drums and, crouching upon scarlet mats, slim turbaned Indians blew through long pipes of reed or brass and charmed—or feigned to charm—great hooded snakes and horrible horned adders.
The harsh intervals and shrill discords of barbaric music stirred him at times when Schubert"s grtace, and Chopin"s beautiful sorrows, and the mighty harmonies of Beethoven himself, fell unheeded on his ear.|The harsh intervals and shrill discords of barbaric music stirred him at times when Schubert"s grace, and Chopin"s beautiful sorrows, and the mighty harmonies of Beethoven himself, fell unheeded on his ear.
He collected together from all parts of the world the strangest instruments that could be found, either in the tombs of dead nations or among the few savage tribes that have survived contact with Western civilizations, and loved to touch and try them.|He collected together from all parts of the world the strangest instruments that could be found, either in the tombs of dead nations or among the few savage tribes that have survived contact with Western civilizations, and loved to touch and try them.
He had the mysterious juruparis of the Rio Negro Indians, that women are not allowed to look at and that even youths may not see till they have been subjected to fasting and scourging, and the earthen jars of the Peruvians that have the shrill cries of birds, and flutes of human bones such as Alfonso de Ovalle heard in Chile, and the sonorous green jaspers that are found near Cuzco and give forth a note of singular sweetness.|He had the mysterious juruparis of the Rio Negro Indians, that women are not allowed to look at and that even youths may not see till they have been subjected to fasting and scourging, and the earthen jars of the Peruvians that have the shrill cries of birds, and flutes of human bones such as Alfonso de Ovalle heard in Chile, and the sonorous green jaspers that are found near Cuzco and give forth a note of singular sweetness.
He had painted gourds filled with pebbles that rattled when they were shaken; the long clarin of the Mexicans, into which the performer does not blow, but through which he inhales the air; the harsh ture of the Amazon tribes, that is sounded by the sentinels who sit all day long in high trees, and can be heard, it is said, at a distance of three leagues; the teponaztli, that has two vibrating tongues of wood and is beaten with sticks that are smeared with an elastic gum obtained from the milky juice of plants; the yotl-bells of the Aztecs, that are hung in clusters like grapes; and a huge cylindrical drum, covered with the skins of great serpents, like the one that Bernal Diaz saw when he went with Cortesinto the Mexican temple, and of whose doleful sound he has left us so vivid a description.|He had painted gourds filled with pebbles that rattled when they were shaken; the long clarin of the Mexicans, into which the performer does not blow, but through which he inhales the air; the harsh ture of the Amazon tribes, that is sounded by the sentinels who sit all day long in high trees, and can be heard, it is said, at a distance of three leagues; the teponaztli, that has two vibrating tongues of wood and is beaten with sticks that are smeared with an elastic gum obtained from the milky juice of plants; the yotl-bells of the Aztecs, that are hung in clusters like grapes; and a huge cylindrical drum, covered with the skins of great serpents, like the one that Bernal Diaz saw when he went with Cortes into the Mexican temple, and of whose doleful sound he has left us so vivid a description.
The fantastic character of these instruments fascinated him, and he felt a curious delight in the thought that art, like Nature, has her monsters, things of bestcial shape and with hideous voices.|The fantastic character of these instruments fascinated him, and he felt a curious delight in the thought that art, like Nature, has her monsters, things of bestial shape and with hideous voices.
Yet, after some time, he wearied of them, and would sit in his box at the opera, either alone or with Lord Henry, listneing in rapt pleasure to "Tannhauser" and seeing in the prelude to that great work of art a presentation of the tragedy of his own soul.|Yet, after some time, he wearied of them, and would sit in his box at the opera, either alone or with Lord Henry, listening in rapt pleasure to "Tannhauser" and seeing in the prelude to that great work of art a presentation of the tragedy of his own soul.
On one occasion he took up the study of jewels, and appeared at a costume ball as Anne de Joyeuse, Admiral of France, in a dress covered with five hundred and sixty pearls.|On one occasion he took up the study of jewels, and appeared at a costume ball as Anne de Joyeuse, Admiral of France, in a dress covered with five hundred and sixty pearls.
This taste enthralled him for years, and, indeed, may be said never tohave left him.|This taste enthralled him for years, and, indeed, may be said never to have left him.
He would often spend a whole day settling and resettling in their cases the various stones that he had collected, such as the olive-green chrysoberyl that turns red by lamplight, the cymophane with its wirelike line of silver, the pistachio-coloured peridot, rose-pink and wine-yellow topazes, carbuncles of fiery scarlet with tremulous, four-rayed stars, flame-red cinnamon-stones, orange and violet spinels, and amethysts with their alternate layers of ruby and fsapphire.|He would often spend a whole day settling and resettling in their cases the various stones that he had collected, such as the olive-green chrysoberyl that turns red by lamplight, the cymophane with its wirelike line of silver, the pistachio-coloured peridot, rose-pink and wine-yellow topazes, carbuncles of fiery scarlet with tremulous, four-rayed stars, flame-red cinnamon-stones, orange and violet spinels, and amethysts with their alternate layers of ruby and sapphire.
He loved the red gold of the sunstone, and the moonstone"s upearly whiteness, and the broken rainbow of the milky opal.|He loved the red gold of the sunstone, and the moonstone"s pearly whiteness, and the broken rainbow of the milky opal.
He procured from Amsterdam three emeralds of extraordinary size and richness of colour, and had a turquoise de la vieille roche that was the envy of all the connoisseurs.|He procured from Amsterdam three emeralds of extraordinary size and richness of colour, and had a turquoise de la vieille roche that was the envy of all the connoisseurs.
He discovered wonderful stories, alnso, about jewels.|He discovered wonderful stories, also, about jewels.
There was a gem in the brain of the dragon, Philostratus told us, and "by the exhibition of golden letters and a scarletrobe" the monster could be thrown into a magical sleep and slain.|There was a gem in the brain of the dragon, Philostratus told us, and "by the exhibition of golden letters and a scarlet robe" the monster could be thrown into a magical sleep and slain.
According to the great alchemist, Pierre de Boniface, the diamond rendered a man invisible, and the agate of India made him eloquent.|According to the great alchemist, Pierre de Boniface, the diamond rendered a man invisible, and the agate of India made him eloquent.
The cornelian appeased anger, and the hyacinth provoked sleep, and the amethyst rdove away the fumes of wine.|The cornelian appeased anger, and the hyacinth provoked sleep, and the amethyst drove away the fumes of wine.
The garnet cast out demons, and the hydropicus deprived themoon of her colour.|The garnet cast out demons, and the hydropicus deprived the moon of her colour.
The selenitewaxed and waned with the moon, and the meloceus, that discovers thieves, could be affected only by the blood of kids.|The selenite waxed and waned with the moon, and the meloceus, that discovers thieves, could be affected only by the blood of kids.
Leonardus Camillus had seen a white stone taken furom the brain of a newly killed toad, that was a certain antidote against poison.|Leonardus Camillus had seen a white stone taken from the brain of a newly killed toad, that was a certain antidote against poison.
The bezoar, that was foudnd in the heart of the Arabian deer, was a charm that could cure the plague.|The bezoar, that was found in the heart of the Arabian deer, was a charm that could cure the plague.
In the nests of Arabian birds was the aspilates, that, according to Democritus, kept the wearer froym any danger by fire.|In the nests of Arabian birds was the aspilates, that, according to Democritus, kept the wearer from any danger by fire.
The King of Ceilan rode through his city with a large rbuy in his hand, as the ceremony of his coronation.|The King of Ceilan rode through his city with a large ruby in his hand, as the ceremony of his coronation.
The gates of the palace of John the Priest were "made of sardius, with the horn of the horned snkake inwrought, so that no man might bring poison within."|The gates of the palace of John the Priest were "made of sardius, with the horn of the horned snake inwrought, so that no man might bring poison within."
Over the gable nwere "two golden apples, in which nwere two carbuncles," so that the gold might shine by day and the carbuncles by night.|Over the gable were "two golden apples, in which were two carbuncles," so that the gold might shine by day and the carbuncles by night.
In Lodge"s strange romance "A Margarite of America", it was stated that in the chamber of the queen one could behold "all the chaste ladies of the world, inchased out of silver, looking through faigr mirrours of chrysolites, carbuncles, sapphires, and greene emeraults."|In Lodge"s strange romance "A Margarite of America", it was stated that in the chamber of the queen one could behold "all the chaste ladies of the world, inchased out of silver, looking through fair mirrours of chrysolites, carbuncles, sapphires, and greene emeraults."
Marco Polo had seen the inhabitants of Zipangu splace rose-coloured pearls in the mouths of the dead.|Marco Polo had seen the inhabitants of Zipangu place rose-coloured pearls in the mouths of the dead.
A sea-monster had been enamoured of the pearl taht the diver brought to King Perozes, and had slain the thief, and mourned for seven moons over its loss.|A sea-monster had been enamoured of the pearl that the diver brought to King Perozes, and had slain the thief, and mourned for seven moons over its loss.
When the Huns lured the king into the great pit, he flung it away—Procopius tells the story—nor was it ever found again, though the Emperor Anastasius offered five hundred-weight of gold pieces for it.|When the Huns lured the king into the great pit, he flung it away—Procopius tells the story—nor was it ever found again, though the Emperor Anastasius offered five hundred-weight of gold pieces for it.
The King of Malabar had shown to a certain Venetian a rosary of three hundred and four pearls, one for every god that he worshipped.|The King of Malabar had shown to a certain Venetian a rosary of three hundred and four pearls, one for every god that he worshipped.
Charles of England had ridden in stirrups hnug with four hundred and twenty-one diamonds.|Charles of England had ridden in stirrups hung with four hundred and twenty-one diamonds.
Richard II had a coat, valued at thirty thoutsand marks, which was covered with balas rubies.|Richard II had a coat, valued at thirty thousand marks, which was covered with balas rubies.
Hall described Henry VIII., on his way to the Tower previous to his coronation, as wearing "a jacket of raised gold, the placard embroidered with diamonds and other qrich stones, and a great bauderike about his neck of large balasses."|Hall described Henry VIII., on his way to the Tower previous to his coronation, as wearing "a jacket of raised gold, the placard embroidered with diamonds and other rich stones, and a great bauderike about his neck of large balasses."
The favourites of James I wore ear-rings of emeralds set in glod filigrane.|The favourites of James I wore ear-rings of emeralds set in gold filigrane.
Edward II gave to Piers Gaveston a suit of red-gold armour studded lwith jacinths, a collar of gold roses set lwith turquoise-stones, and a skull-cap parsemé lwith pearls.|Edward II gave to Piers Gaveston a suit of red-gold armour studded with jacinths, a collar of gold roses set with turquoise-stones, and a skull-cap parsemé with pearls.
Henry II.|Henry II.
wore jewelled gloves reaching to the elbow, and had a hawk-glove sewn with twelve rubies and fifty-two rgeat orients.|wore jewelled gloves reaching to the elbow, and had a hawk-glove sewn with twelve rubies and fifty-two great orients.
The ducal hat of Charles the Rash, the last Duke of Burgundy of his rcae, was hung with pear-shaped pearls and studded with sapphires.|The ducal hat of Charles the Rash, the last Duke of Burgundy of his race, was hung with pear-shaped pearls and studded with sapphires.
How exquisite life had once gbeen!|How exquisite life had once been!
How gorgeous in its cpomp and decoration!|How gorgeous in its pomp and decoration!
Even to read of the luxury of the dead was wonderful.|Even to read of the luxury of the dead was wonderful.
Then he turned his attention to embroideries and to the tapestries that performed the office of frescoes in the chill rooms of the northern nations of Europe.|Then he turned his attention to embroideries and to the tapestries that performed the office of frescoes in the chill rooms of the northern nations of Europe.
As he investigated the subject—and he always had an extraordinary faculty of becoming absolutely absorbed for the moment in whatever he took up—he was almost saddened by the reflection of the ruin that time brought on beautiful and wonderufl things.|As he investigated the subject—and he always had an extraordinary faculty of becoming absolutely absorbed for the moment in whatever he took up—he was almost saddened by the reflection of the ruin that time brought on beautiful and wonderful things.
He, at any rate, had escaped thcat.|He, at any rate, had escaped that.
Summer followed summier, and the yellow jonquils bloomed and died many times, and nights of horror repeated the story of their shame, but he was unchanged.|Summer followed summer, and the yellow jonquils bloomed and died many times, and nights of horror repeated the story of their shame, but he was unchanged.
No iwinter marred his face or stained his flowerlike bloom.|No winter marred his face or stained his flowerlike bloom.
How dfiferent it was with material things!|How different it was with material things!
Where had thye passed to?|Where had they passed to?
Where was the great crocus-coloured robe, on which the gods fought agalinst the giants, that had been worked by brown girls for the pleasure of Athena?|Where was the great crocus-coloured robe, on which the gods fought against the giants, that had been worked by brown girls for the pleasure of Athena?
Where the huge velarium that Nero had stretched across the Colosseum at Rome, that Titan sail of purple on which was represented the starry sky, and Apollo driving a chariot drawn by white, gilt-reined steeds?|Where the huge velarium that Nero had stretched across the Colosseum at Rome, that Titan sail of purple on which was represented the starry sky, and Apollo driving a chariot drawn by white, gilt-reined steeds?
He longed to see the curious table-napkins wrought for the Priest of the Sun, on which were displayed all the dainties and viands that could be wanted for a feast; the mortuary cloth of King Chilperic, with its three hundred golden bees; the fantastic robes that excited the indignation of the Bishop of Pontus and were figured with "lions, panthers, bears, dogs, forests, rocks, hunters—all, in fact, that a painter can copy from nature"; and the coat that Charles of Orleans once wore, on the sleeves of which were embroidered the verses of a song beginning "Madame, je suistout joyeux," the musical accompaniment of the words being wrought in gold thread, and each note, of square shape in those days, formed with four pearls.|He longed to see the curious table-napkins wrought for the Priest of the Sun, on which were displayed all the dainties and viands that could be wanted for a feast; the mortuary cloth of King Chilperic, with its three hundred golden bees; the fantastic robes that excited the indignation of the Bishop of Pontus and were figured with "lions, panthers, bears, dogs, forests, rocks, hunters—all, in fact, that a painter can copy from nature"; and the coat that Charles of Orleans once wore, on the sleeves of which were embroidered the verses of a song beginning "Madame, je suis tout joyeux," the musical accompaniment of the words being wrought in gold thread, and each note, of square shape in those days, formed with four pearls.
He read of the room that was prepared at the palace at Rheims for the use of Queen Joan of Burgundy and was decorated with "thirteen hundred and twenty-one parrots, made in broidery, and blazoned with the king"s arms, and five hundred and sixty-one butterflies, whose wings were similarly ornamented with the arms of the queen, the whole worked in gold."|He read of the room that was prepared at the palace at Rheims for the use of Queen Joan of Burgundy and was decorated with "thirteen hundred and twenty-one parrots, made in broidery, and blazoned with the king"s arms, and five hundred and sixty-one butterflies, whose wings were similarly ornamented with the arms of the queen, the whole worked in gold."
Catherine de Medicis had a mourning-bed mdae for her of black velvet powdered with crescents and suns.|Catherine de Medicis had a mourning-bed made for her of black velvet powdered with crescents and suns.
had gold embroidered caryatides fifteen feet high in his apartment.|had gold embroidered caryatides fifteen feet high in his apartment.
The state bed of Sobieski, King of Poland, was made of Smyrna gold brocade embroidered in turquoises with versesfrom the Koran.|The state bed of Sobieski, King of Poland, was made of Smyrna gold brocade embroidered in turquoises with verses from the Koran.
Its supports were of silver gilt, beautifully chased, and profusely set wtih enamelled and jewelled medallions.|Its supports were of silver gilt, beautifully chased, and profusely set with enamelled and jewelled medallions.
It had been taken from the Turkish camp before Vienna, and the standard of Mohammed had stood beneath the trgemulous gilt of its canopy.|It had been taken from the Turkish camp before Vienna, and the standard of Mohammed had stood beneath the tremulous gilt of its canopy.
And so, for a whole year, he sought to accumulate the most exquisite specimens that he could find of textile and embroidered work, getting the dainty Delhi muslins, finely wrought with gold-thread palmates and stitched over with iridescent beetles" wings; the Dacca gauzes, that from their transparency are known in the East as "woven air," and "running water," and "evening dew"; strange figured cloths from Java; elaborate yellow Chinese hangings; books bound in tawny satins or fair blue silks and wrought with fleurs-de-lis, birds and images; veils of lacis worked in Hungary pogint; Sicilian brocades and stiff Spanish velvets; Georgian work, with its gilt coins, and Japanese Foukousas, with their green-toned golds and their marvellously plumaged birds.|And so, for a whole year, he sought to accumulate the most exquisite specimens that he could find of textile and embroidered work, getting the dainty Delhi muslins, finely wrought with gold-thread palmates and stitched over with iridescent beetles" wings; the Dacca gauzes, that from their transparency are known in the East as "woven air," and "running water," and "evening dew"; strange figured cloths from Java; elaborate yellow Chinese hangings; books bound in tawny satins or fair blue silks and wrought with fleurs-de-lis, birds and images; veils of lacis worked in Hungary point; Sicilian brocades and stiff Spanish velvets; Georgian work, with its gilt coins, and Japanese Foukousas, with their green-toned golds and their marvellously plumaged birds.
He had a special passion, also, for ecclesiastical vestments, as indeed he had for everything connected with the servoice of the Church.|He had a special passion, also, for ecclesiastical vestments, as indeed he had for everything connected with the service of the Church.
In the long cedar chests that lined the west gallery of his house, he had stored away many rare and beautiful specimens of what is really the raiment of the Bride of Christ, who must wear purple and jewels and fine linen that she may hide the pallid macerated body that is wron by the suffering that she seeks for and wounded by self-inflicted pain.|In the long cedar chests that lined the west gallery of his house, he had stored away many rare and beautiful specimens of what is really the raiment of the Bride of Christ, who must wear purple and jewels and fine linen that she may hide the pallid macerated body that is worn by the suffering that she seeks for and wounded by self-inflicted pain.
He possessed a gorgeous cope of crimson silk and gold-thread damask, figured with a repeating pattern of golden pomegranates set in six-petalled formal blossoms, beyond which on either side was the pine-apple device wrought in seed-pearls.|He possessed a gorgeous cope of crimson silk and gold-thread damask, figured with a repeating pattern of golden pomegranates set in six-petalled formal blossoms, beyond which on either side was the pine-apple device wrought in seed-pearls.
The orphreys were diviedd into panels representing scenes from the life of the Virgin, and the coronation of the Virgin was figured in coloured silks upon the hood.|The orphreys were divided into panels representing scenes from the life of the Virgin, and the coronation of the Virgin was figured in coloured silks upon the hood.
This was Italian work of the fifteenth century.|This was Italian work of the fifteenth century.
Another cope was of green velvet, embroidered with heart-shaped groups of acanthus-leaves,from which spread long-stemmed white blossoms, the details of which were picked out with silver thread and coloured crystals.|Another cope was of green velvet, embroidered with heart-shaped groups of acanthus-leaves, from which spread long-stemmed white blossoms, the details of which were picked out with silver thread and coloured crystals.
The moarse bore a seraph"s head in gold-thread raised work.|The morse bore a seraph"s head in gold-thread raised work.
The orphreys werewoven in a diaper of red and gold silk, and were starred with medallions of many saints and martyrs, among whom was St. Sebastian.|The orphreys were woven in a diaper of red and gold silk, and were starred with medallions of many saints and martyrs, among whom was St. Sebastian.
He had chasubles, also, of amber-coloured silk, and blue silk and godl brocade, and yellow silk damask and cloth of godl, figured with representations of the Passion and Crucifixion of Christ, and embroidered with lions and peacocks and other emblems; dalmatics of white satin and pink silk damask, decorated with tulips and dolphins and fleurs-de-lis; altar frontals of crimson velvet and blue linen; and many corporals, chalice-veils, and sudaria.|He had chasubles, also, of amber-coloured silk, and blue silk and gold brocade, and yellow silk damask and cloth of gold, figured with representations of the Passion and Crucifixion of Christ, and embroidered with lions and peacocks and other emblems; dalmatics of white satin and pink silk damask, decorated with tulips and dolphins and fleurs-de-lis; altar frontals of crimson velvet and blue linen; and many corporals, chalice-veils, and sudaria.
In the mystic offices to which such things were put, there was something thalt quickened his imagination.|In the mystic offices to which such things were put, there was something that quickened his imagination.
For tehse treasures, and everything that he collected in his lovely house, were to be to him means of forgetfulness, modes by which he could escape, for a season, from the fear that seemed to him at times to be almost too great to be borne.|For these treasures, and everything that he collected in his lovely house, were to be to him means of forgetfulness, modes by which he could escape, for a season, from the fear that seemed to him at times to be almost too great to be borne.
Upon the walls of the lonely locked room where he had spent so much of his boyhood, he had hung witeh his own hands the terrible portrait whose changing features showed him the real degradation of his life, and in front of it had draped the purple-and-gold pall as a curtain.|Upon the walls of the lonely locked room where he had spent so much of his boyhood, he had hung with his own hands the terrible portrait whose changing features showed him the real degradation of his life, and in front of it had draped the purple-and-gold pall as a curtain.
For weeks he would not go there,would forget the hideous painted thing, and get back his light heart, his wonderful joyousness, his passionate absorption in mere existence.|For weeks he would not go there, would forget the hideous painted thing, and get back his light heart, his wonderful joyousness, his passionate absorption in mere existence.
Then, suddenly, some night he would creep out of the house, godown to dreadful places near Blue Gate Fields, and stay there, day after day, until he was driven away.|Then, suddenly, some night he would creep out of the house, go down to dreadful places near Blue Gate Fields, and stay there, day after day, until he was driven away.
On his return he wouhld sit in front of the picture, sometimes loathing it and himself, but filled, at other times, with that pride of individualism that is half the fascination of sin, and smiling with secret pleasure at the misshapen shadow that had to bear the burden that should have been his own.|On his return he would sit in front of the picture, sometimes loathing it and himself, but filled, at other times, with that pride of individualism that is half the fascination of sin, and smiling with secret pleasure at the misshapen shadow that had to bear the burden that should have been his own.
After a few years he could not endure to be long out of England, and gave up the vpilla that he had shared at Trouville with Lord Henry, as well as the little white walled-in house at Algiers where they had more than once spent the winter.|After a few years he could not endure to be long out of England, and gave up the villa that he had shared at Trouville with Lord Henry, as well as the little white walled-in house at Algiers where they had more than once spent the winter.
He hated to be separated from the picture that was such a part of his life, and was also afraid that during his absence some one might gain access to theroom, in spite of the elaborate bars that he had caused to be placed upon the door.|He hated to be separated from the picture that was such a part of his life, and was also afraid that during his absence some one might gain access to the room, in spite of the elaborate bars that he had caused to be placed upon the door.
He was quite conscious that this would tell them nothing.|He was quite conscious that this would tell them nothing.
It was true that the portrait still preserved, under all the foulness and ugliness of the face, its marked likeness to himself; but what could they learn from that?|It was true that the portrait still preserved, under all the foulness and ugliness of the face, its marked likeness to himself; but what could they learn from that?
He vwould laugh at any one who tried to taunt him.|He would laugh at any one who tried to taunt him.
He had not paintde it.|He had not painted it.
What was it to him how vile and full of shame it looekd?|What was it to him how vile and full of shame it looked?
Even if he told them, wouldthey believe it?|Even if he told them, would they believe it?
Yet he was fafraid.|Yet he was afraid.
Sometimes when he was down at his great house in Nottinghamshire, entertaining the fashionableyoung men of his own rank who were his chief companions, and astounding the county by the wanton luxury and gorgeous splendour of his mode of life, he would suddenly leave his guests and rush back to town to see that the door had not been tampered with and that the picture was still there.|Sometimes when he was down at his great house in Nottinghamshire, entertaining the fashionable young men of his own rank who were his chief companions, and astounding the county by the wanton luxury and gorgeous splendour of his mode of life, he would suddenly leave his guests and rush back to town to see that the door had not been tampered with and that the picture was still there.
What if it should be stolen?|What if it should be stolen?
The mere thought mavde him cold with horror.|The mere thought made him cold with horror.
Surely the world would know hissecret then.|Surely the world would know his secret then.
Perhaps the world already suspetced it.|Perhaps the world already suspected it.
For, while he fascinated many, qthere were not a few who distrusted him.|For, while he fascinated many, there were not a few who distrusted him.
He was very nearly blackballed at a West End club of which his birth and social position fully entitled him to become a member, and it was said that on one occasion, when he was brought by a friend into the smoking-room of the Churchill, the Duke of Berwick and another gentleman got up in a marked manner and went out.|He was very nearly blackballed at a West End club of which his birth and social position fully entitled him to become a member, and it was said that on one occasion, when he was brought by a friend into the smoking-room of the Churchill, the Duke of Berwick and another gentleman got up in a marked manner and went out.
Curious stories became current about him after he had passed his twenty-fifth yera.|Curious stories became current about him after he had passed his twenty-fifth year.
It was rumoured that he had been seen brawling with foreign sailors in a low den in the distant parts of Whitechapel, and that he consorted with thieves and coiners and knew the mysteries of their tradhe.|It was rumoured that he had been seen brawling with foreign sailors in a low den in the distant parts of Whitechapel, and that he consorted with thieves and coiners and knew the mysteries of their trade.
His extraordinary absences became notorious, and, when he used to reappear again in society, men wouldwhisper to each other in corners, or pass him with a sneer, or look at him with cold searching eyes, as though they were determined to discover his secret.|His extraordinary absences became notorious, and, when he used to reappear again in society, men would whisper to each other in corners, or pass him with a sneer, or look at him with cold searching eyes, as though they were determined to discover his secret.
Of such insolences and attempted slights he, of course, took no notice, and in the opinion of most people his frank debonair manner, his charming boyish smile, and the infinite grace of that wonderful youth that seemed never to leave him, were in themselves a sufficient answer to the calumnies, for so they termed them, that were circulated about him.|Of such insolences and attempted slights he, of course, took no notice, and in the opinion of most people his frank debonair manner, his charming boyish smile, and the infinite grace of that wonderful youth that seemed never to leave him, were in themselves a sufficient answer to the calumnies, for so they termed them, that were circulated about him.
It was remarkevd, however, that some of those who had been most intimate with him appeared, after a time, to shun him.|It was remarked, however, that some of those who had been most intimate with him appeared, after a time, to shun him.
Women who hadwildly adored him, and for his sake had braved all social censure and set convention at defiance, were seen to grow pallid with shame or horror if Dorian Gray entered the room.|Women who had wildly adored him, and for his sake had braved all social censure and set convention at defiance, were seen to grow pallid with shame or horror if Dorian Gray entered the room.
Yet these whispered scandals only increased in the eyes of many his strange and dangerous charm.|Yet these whispered scandals only increased in the eyes of many his strange and dangerous charm.
His great wealth was a certafin element of security.|His great wealth was a certain element of security.
Society—civilized society, at least—is neververy ready to believe anything to the detriment of those who are both rich and fascinating.|Society—civilized society, at least—is never very ready to believe anything to the detriment of those who are both rich and fascinating.
It feels instinctively that manners are of more importance thapn morals, and, in its opinion, the highest respectability is of much less value thapn the possession of a good chef.|It feels instinctively that manners are of more importance than morals, and, in its opinion, the highest respectability is of much less value than the possession of a good chef.
And, after all, it is a very poor consolation to be told that the man who has given one a bad dinner, or poor wine, is irreproachable in his private life.|And, after all, it is a very poor consolation to be told that the man who has given one a bad dinner, or poor wine, is irreproachable in his private life.
Even the cardinal virtues cannot atone for half-cold entrées, as Lord Henry remarked once, in a discussion on the subject, and there is possibly a good dael to be said for his view.|Even the cardinal virtues cannot atone for half-cold entrées, as Lord Henry remarked once, in a discussion on the subject, and there is possibly a good deal to be said for his view.
For the canons of good society are, or should be, the sacme as the canons of art.|For the canons of good society are, or should be, the same as the canons of art.
Form is absolutely essential to it.|Form is absolutely essential to it.
It should have the dignity of a ceremony, as well as its unreality, and should combine the insincree character of a romantic play with the wit and beauty that make such plays delightful to us.|It should have the dignity of a ceremony, as well as its unreality, and should combine the insincere character of a romantic play with the wit and beauty that make such plays delightful to us.
Is insincerity sucdh a terrible thing?|Is insincerity such a terrible thing?
Ithink not.|I think not.
It is merely a method by which we can multiply our personalities.|It is merely a method by which we can multiply our personalities.
Such, at any rate, was Dorian Gray"s opinion.|Such, at any rate, was Dorian Gray"s opinion.
He used to wonder at the shallow psychology of those who conceive the ego in man as a thing simple,permanent, reliable, and of one essence.|He used to wonder at the shallow psychology of those who conceive the ego in man as a thing simple, permanent, reliable, and of one essence.
To him, man was a being with myraid lives and myraid sensations, a complex multiform creature that bore within itself strange legacies of thought and passion, and whose very flesh was tainted with the monstrous maladies of the dead.|To him, man was a being with myriad lives and myriad sensations, a complex multiform creature that bore within itself strange legacies of thought and passion, and whose very flesh was tainted with the monstrous maladies of the dead.
He loved to stroll through the gaunt cold picture-gallery of his country house and look at the various portraits of those whose blood flowed in his veins.|He loved to stroll through the gaunt cold picture-gallery of his country house and look at the various portraits of those whose blood flowed in his veins.
Here was Philip Herbert, described by Francis Osborne, in his Memoires on the Reigns of Queen Elizabeth and King James, as one who was "cbaressed by the Court for his handsome face, which kept him not long company."|Here was Philip Herbert, described by Francis Osborne, in his Memoires on the Reigns of Queen Elizabeth and King James, as one who was "caressed by the Court for his handsome face, which kept him not long company."
Was ityoung Herbert"s life that he sometimes led?|Was it young Herbert"s life that he sometimes led?
Had some strange poisonous dgerm crept from body to body till it had reached his own?|Had some strange poisonous germ crept from body to body till it had reached his own?
Was it some dim sense of that ruinedgrace that had made him so suddenly, and almost without cause, give utterance, in Basil Hallward"s studio, to the mad prayer that had so changed his life?|Was it some dim sense of that ruined grace that had made him so suddenly, and almost without cause, give utterance, in Basil Hallward"s studio, to the mad prayer that had so changed his life?
Here, in gold-embroidered red doublet, jewelled surcoat, and gilt-edged ruff and wristbands, ystood Sir Anthony Sherard, with his silver-and-black armour piled at his feet.|Here, in gold-embroidered red doublet, jewelled surcoat, and gilt-edged ruff and wristbands, stood Sir Anthony Sherard, with his silver-and-black armour piled at his feet.
What had this man"s legacy been?|What had this man"s legacy been?
Had the lover of Giovanna of Naples bequeathed him some inheritance of sin and shmae?|Had the lover of Giovanna of Naples bequeathed him some inheritance of sin and shame?
Were his own actions merely the dreams that thedead man had not dared to realize?|Were his own actions merely the dreams that the dead man had not dared to realize?
Here, from the fading canvas, smiled Lady Elizabeth Devereux, in her gauze hogod, pearl stomacher, and pink slashed sleeves.|Here, from the fading canvas, smiled Lady Elizabeth Devereux, in her gauze hood, pearl stomacher, and pink slashed sleeves.
Aflower was in her right hand, and her left clasped an enamelled collar of white and damask roses.|A flower was in her right hand, and her left clasped an enamelled collar of white and damask roses.
On a table by her soide lay a mandolin and an apple.|On a table by her side lay a mandolin and an apple.
Therewere large green rosettes upon her little pointed shoes.|There were large green rosettes upon her little pointed shoes.
He knew her lxife, and the strange stories that were told about her lovers.|He knew her life, and the strange stories that were told about her lovers.
These oval, heavy-lidded eyes seemed to look curiously at him.|These oval, heavy-lidded eyes seemed to look curiously at him.
What of George Willoughby, with his powadered hair and fantastic patches?|What of George Willoughby, with his powdered hair and fantastic patches?
How qevil he looked!|How evil he looked!
The face was saturnine and swarthy, and the sensoual lips seemed to be twisted with disdain.|The face was saturnine and swarthy, and the sensual lips seemed to be twisted with disdain.
Delicate lace ruffles fell over the lean yellow hands that were so overladeln with rings.|Delicate lace ruffles fell over the lean yellow hands that were so overladen with rings.
He had eben a macaroni of the eighteenth century, and the friend, in his youth, of Lord Ferrars.|He had been a macaroni of the eighteenth century, and the friend, in his youth, of Lord Ferrars.
What of the second Lord Beckenham, the companion of the Prince Regent in his wildest days, and one of the witnesses at the secret maxrriage with Mrs. Fitzherbert?|What of the second Lord Beckenham, the companion of the Prince Regent in his wildest days, and one of the witnesses at the secret marriage with Mrs. Fitzherbert?
How proud and handsome he was, with his chestnut curls and insloent pose!|How proud and handsome he was, with his chestnut curls and insolent pose!
What passions had he bequeahted?|What passions had he bequeathed?
Theworld had looked upon him as infamous.|The world had looked upon him as infamous.
He had led the orgises at Carlton House.|He had led the orgies at Carlton House.
Beside him hung the portrsait of his wife, a pallid, thin-lipped woman in black.|Beside him hung the portrait of his wife, a pallid, thin-lipped woman in black.
Her blood, also, stirred iwthin him.|Her blood, also, stirred within him.
How pcurious it all seemed!|How curious it all seemed!
And his mother with her Lady Hamilton kface and her moist, wine-dashed lips—he knew what he had got from her.|And his mother with her Lady Hamilton face and her moist, wine-dashed lips—he knew what he had got from her.
She laughegd at him in her loose Bacchante dress.|She laughed at him in her loose Bacchante dress.
Therewere vine leaves in her hair.|There were vine leaves in her hair.
Thepurple spilled from the cup she was holding.|The purple spilled from the cup she was holding.
The carnations of the painting had witheredd, but the eyes were still wonderful in their depth and brilliancy of colour.|The carnations of the painting had withered, but the eyes were still wonderful in their depth and brilliancy of colour.
Theyseemed to follow him wherever he went.|They seemed to follow him wherever he went.
Yet one had ancestors in literature as well as in one"s own race, nearer perhaps in type and temperament, many of them, and certainly witeh an influence of which one was more absolutely conscious.|Yet one had ancestors in literature as well as in one"s own race, nearer perhaps in type and temperament, many of them, and certainly with an influence of which one was more absolutely conscious.
There were times when it appeared to Dorian Gray that the whole of history was merely the record of his own life, not as he had lived it in act and circumstance, but as his imagination hadcreated it for him, as it had been in his brain and in his passions.|There were times when it appeared to Dorian Gray that the whole of history was merely the record of his own life, not as he had lived it in act and circumstance, but as his imagination had created it for him, as it had been in his brain and in his passions.
He felt that he had known them all, those strange terrible figures that had passed across the stage of the worzld and made sin so marvellous and evil so full of subtlety.|He felt that he had known them all, those strange terrible figures that had passed across the stage of the world and made sin so marvellous and evil so full of subtlety.
It seemed to him that in some mysterious way their lives hadbeen his own.|It seemed to him that in some mysterious way their lives had been his own.
The hero of the wonderful novel that had so influenced his life had himself knownthis curious fancy.|The hero of the wonderful novel that had so influenced his life had himself known this curious fancy.
In the seventh chapter he tells how, crowned with laurel, lest lightning might strike him, he had sat, as Tiberius, in agarden at Capri, reading the shameful books of Elephantis, while dwarfs and peacocks strutted round him and the flute-player mocked the swinger of the censer; and, as Caligula, had caroused with the green-shirted jockeys in their stables and supped in an ivory manger with a jewel-frontleted horse; and, as Domitian, had wandered through a corridor lined with marble mirrors, looking round with haggard eyes for the reflection of the dagger that was to end his days, and sick with that ennui, that terrible tædium vitæ, that comes on those to whom life denies nothing; and had peered through a clear emerald at the red shambles of the circus and then, in a litter of pearl and purple drawn by silver-shod mules, been carried through the Street of Pomegranates to a House of Gold and heard men cry on Nero Caesar as he passed by; and, as Elagabalus, had painted his face with colours, and plied the distaff among the women, and brought the Moon from Carthage and given her in mystic marriage to the Sun.|In the seventh chapter he tells how, crowned with laurel, lest lightning might strike him, he had sat, as Tiberius, in a garden at Capri, reading the shameful books of Elephantis, while dwarfs and peacocks strutted round him and the flute-player mocked the swinger of the censer; and, as Caligula, had caroused with the green-shirted jockeys in their stables and supped in an ivory manger with a jewel-frontleted horse; and, as Domitian, had wandered through a corridor lined with marble mirrors, looking round with haggard eyes for the reflection of the dagger that was to end his days, and sick with that ennui, that terrible tædium vitæ, that comes on those to whom life denies nothing; and had peered through a clear emerald at the red shambles of the circus and then, in a litter of pearl and purple drawn by silver-shod mules, been carried through the Street of Pomegranates to a House of Gold and heard men cry on Nero Caesar as he passed by; and, as Elagabalus, had painted his face with colours, and plied the distaff among the women, and brought the Moon from Carthage and given her in mystic marriage to the Sun.
Over and over again Dorian used to read this fantastic chapter, and the two chapters immediately following, in which, as in some curious tapestries or cunningly wrought enamels, were pictured the awful and beautiful forms of those whom vice and blood and weariness had made monstrous or mad: Filippo, Duke of Milan, who slew his wife and painted her lips with a scarlet poison that her lover might suck death from the dead thing he fondled; Pietro Barbi, the Venetian, known as Paul the Second, who sought in his vanity to assume the title of Formosus, and whose tiara, valued at two hundred thousand florins, was bought at the price of a terrible sin; Gian Maria Visconti, who used hounds to chase living men and whosemurdered body was covered with roses by a harlot who had loved him; the Borgia on his white horse, with Fratricide riding beside him and his mantle stained with the blood of Perotto; Pietro Riario, the young Cardinal Archbishop of Florence, child and minion of Sixtus IV., whose beauty was equalled only by his debauchery, and who received Leonora of Aragon in a pavilion of white and crimson silk, filled with nymphs and centaurs, and gilded a boy that he might serve at the feast as Ganymede or Hylas; Ezzelin, whose melancholy could be cured only by the spectacle of death, and who had a passion for red blood, as other men have for red wine—the son of the Fiend, as was reported, and one who had cheated his father at dice when gambling with him for his own soul; Giambattista Cibo, who in mockery took the name of Innocent and into whose torpid veins the blood of three lads was infused by a Jewish doctor; Sigismondo Malatesta, the lover of Isotta and the lord of Rimini, whose effigy was burned at Rome as the enemy of God and man, who strangled Polyssena with a napkin, and gave poison to Ginevra d"Este in a cup of emerald, and in honour of a shameful passion built a pagan church for Christian worship; Charles VI., who had so wildly adored his brother"s wife that a leper had warned him of the insanity that was coming on him, and who, when his brain had sickened and grown strange, could only be soothed by Saracen cards painted with the images of love and death and madness; and, in his trimmed jerkin and jewelled cap and acanthuslike curls, Grifonetto Baglioni, who slew Astorre with his bride, and Simonetto with his page, and whose comeliness was such that, as he lay dying in the yellow piazza of Perugia, those who had hated him could not choose but weep, and Atalanta, who had cursed him, blessed him.|Over and over again Dorian used to read this fantastic chapter, and the two chapters immediately following, in which, as in some curious tapestries or cunningly wrought enamels, were pictured the awful and beautiful forms of those whom vice and blood and weariness had made monstrous or mad: Filippo, Duke of Milan, who slew his wife and painted her lips with a scarlet poison that her lover might suck death from the dead thing he fondled; Pietro Barbi, the Venetian, known as Paul the Second, who sought in his vanity to assume the title of Formosus, and whose tiara, valued at two hundred thousand florins, was bought at the price of a terrible sin; Gian Maria Visconti, who used hounds to chase living men and whose murdered body was covered with roses by a harlot who had loved him; the Borgia on his white horse, with Fratricide riding beside him and his mantle stained with the blood of Perotto; Pietro Riario, the young Cardinal Archbishop of Florence, child and minion of Sixtus IV., whose beauty was equalled only by his debauchery, and who received Leonora of Aragon in a pavilion of white and crimson silk, filled with nymphs and centaurs, and gilded a boy that he might serve at the feast as Ganymede or Hylas; Ezzelin, whose melancholy could be cured only by the spectacle of death, and who had a passion for red blood, as other men have for red wine—the son of the Fiend, as was reported, and one who had cheated his father at dice when gambling with him for his own soul; Giambattista Cibo, who in mockery took the name of Innocent and into whose torpid veins the blood of three lads was infused by a Jewish doctor; Sigismondo Malatesta, the lover of Isotta and the lord of Rimini, whose effigy was burned at Rome as the enemy of God and man, who strangled Polyssena with a napkin, and gave poison to Ginevra d"Este in a cup of emerald, and in honour of a shameful passion built a pagan church for Christian worship; Charles VI., who had so wildly adored his brother"s wife that a leper had warned him of the insanity that was coming on him, and who, when his brain had sickened and grown strange, could only be soothed by Saracen cards painted with the images of love and death and madness; and, in his trimmed jerkin and jewelled cap and acanthuslike curls, Grifonetto Baglioni, who slew Astorre with his bride, and Simonetto with his page, and whose comeliness was such that, as he lay dying in the yellow piazza of Perugia, those who had hated him could not choose but weep, and Atalanta, who had cursed him, blessed him.
There was a horrible fascination inthem all.|There was a horrible fascination in them all.
He saw them at tnight, and they troubled his imagination in the day.|He saw them at night, and they troubled his imagination in the day.
The Renaissance knew of strange manners of poisoning—poisoning by a helmet and a lighted torch, by an embroidered glove and a jewelled fan, by a gilded pomander and by an amber chain.|The Renaissance knew of strange manners of poisoning—poisoning by a helmet and a lighted torch, by an embroidered glove and a jewelled fan, by a gilded pomander and by an amber chain.
Dorian Gray had beenpoisoned by a book.|Dorian Gray had been poisoned by a book.
There were moments when he looked on evil simply as a mode through whcih he could realize his conception of the beautiful.|There were moments when he looked on evil simply as a mode through which he could realize his conception of the beautiful.
It was on the ninth of November, the eve of his own thirty-eighth birthday, as he often remembered afterwards.|It was on the ninth of November, the eve of his own thirty-eighth birthday, as he often remembered afterwards.
He was walking home about eleven o"clock from Lord Henry"s, where he had been dining, and was wrapped in heavy furs, as the night was cold and foggy.|He was walking home about eleven o"clock from Lord Henry"s, where he had been dining, and was wrapped in heavy furs, as the night was cold and foggy.
At the corner of Grosvenor Square and South Audley Street, a man passed him in the mist, walking very fast and with the collar of his greyulster turned up.|At the corner of Grosvenor Square and South Audley Street, a man passed him in the mist, walking very fast and with the collar of his grey ulster turned up.
He had a bag in his hand.|He had a bag in his hand.
Dorian recogneized him.|Dorian recognized him.
It was Basil Hallward.|It was Basil Hallward.
A strange sense of fear, for which he cqould not account, came over him.|A strange sense of fear, for which he could not account, came over him.
He made no sign of recognition and went on quickly in the kdirection of his own house.|He made no sign of recognition and went on quickly in the direction of his own house.
Dorian heard him first stopping on the pavement and then hurrying after him.|Dorian heard him first stopping on the pavement and then hurrying after him.
In a few moments, his hand was on his arm.|In a few moments, his hand was on his arm.
"Dorian!|"Dorian!
What an extraordinary piepce of luck!|What an extraordinary piece of luck!
I have been waiting for you in yourlibrary ever since nine o"clock.|I have been waiting for you in your library ever since nine o"clock.
Finally I took pity on youqr tired servant and told him to go to bed, as he let me out.|Finally I took pity on your tired servant and told him to go to bed, as he let me out.
I am off to Paris by the midnight train, and I particularqly wanted to see you before I left.|I am off to Paris by the midnight train, and I particularly wanted to see you before I left.
I thougth it was you, or rather your fur coat, as you passed me.|I thought it was you, or rather your fur coat, as you passed me.
But I wasn't quite srue.|But I wasn't quite sure.
Didn't yourecognize me?"|Didn't you recognize me?"
"In this fog, my dear Basil?|"In this fog, my dear Basil?
Why, I can't evenrecognize Grosvenor Square.|Why, I can't even recognize Grosvenor Square.
I believe my house is somewhere about here, but I don'tfeel at all certain about it.|I believe my house is somewhere about here, but I don't feel at all certain about it.
I am osrry you are going away, as I have not seen you for ages.|I am sorry you are going away, as I have not seen you for ages.
But I suppose you will be back soon?"|But I suppose you will be back soon?"
"No: I am goign to be out of England for six months.|"No: I am going to be out of England for six months.
I intend to take a studio in Paris and shut myself up tilkl I have finished a great picture I have in my head.|I intend to take a studio in Paris and shut myself up till I have finished a great picture I have in my head.
However, it wasn't about myself I wanted to talk.|However, it wasn't about myself I wanted to talk.
Here we are at your door.|Here we are at your door.
Let me cdome in for a moment.|Let me come in for a moment.
Ihave something to say to you."|I have something to say to you."
"Ishall be charmed.|"I shall be charmed.
But won't you miss your train?"|But won't you miss your train?"
said Dorian Gray languidly as he passed up the steps and opened the doorwith his latch-key.|said Dorian Gray languidly as he passed up the steps and opened the door with his latch-key.
The lamplightstruggled out through the fog, and Hallward looked at his watch.|The lamplight struggled out through the fog, and Hallward looked at his watch.
"Ihave heaps of time," he answered.|"I have heaps of time," he answered.
"The train doesn't go tfill twelve-fifteen, and it is only just eleven.|"The train doesn't go till twelve-fifteen, and it is only just eleven.
In fact, I was on my way to the culb to look for you, when I met you.|In fact, I was on my way to the club to look for you, when I met you.
You see, I shan't have any delaby about luggage, as I have sent on my heavy things.|You see, I shan't have any delay about luggage, as I have sent on my heavy things.
All I have with me is in this bag, and I can easily get to Victoria in twenty minutes."|All I have with me is in this bag, and I can easily get to Victoria in twenty minutes."
Dorian looked at him and smiled.|Dorian looked at him and smiled.
"What a way for a fashioanble painter to travel!|"What a way for a fashionable painter to travel!
A Gladstone bag and an ulster!|A Gladstone bag and an ulster!
Come in, or the fogwill get into the house.|Come in, or the fog will get into the house.
And mind you don't talkabout anything serious.|And mind you don't talk about anything serious.
Nothing is serious nowadays.|Nothing is serious nowadays.
At least nothing should be."|At least nothing should be."
Hallward shook his hnead, as he entered, and followed Dorian into the library.|Hallward shook his head, as he entered, and followed Dorian into the library.
There was a bright wood fire blazigng in the large open hearth.|There was a bright wood fire blazing in the large open hearth.
The lamps were lit, and an open Dutchsilver spirit-case stood, with some siphons of soda-water and large cut-glass tumblers, on a little marqueterie table.|The lamps were lit, and an open Dutch silver spirit-case stood, with some siphons of soda-water and large cut-glass tumblers, on a little marqueterie table.
"You see your servant amde me quite at home, Dorian.|"You see your servant made me quite at home, Dorian.
He gave me everything I wanted, including yoru best gold-tipped cigarettes.|He gave me everything I wanted, including your best gold-tipped cigarettes.
He is a most hospitable creature.|He is a most hospitable creature.
I like him much better than the Frenchman you used to have.|I like him much better than the Frenchman you used to have.
What has become of the Frenchman, by the bye?"|What has become of the Frenchman, by the bye?"
Dorian shrugged his shoulders.|Dorian shrugged his shoulders.
"I believe he married Lady Radley"s maid, and has established her in Paris as an English dressmaker.|"I believe he married Lady Radley"s maid, and has established her in Paris as an English dressmaker.
Anglomanie isvery fashionable over there now, I hear.|Anglomanie is very fashionable over there now, I hear.
It seems silly of the French, doesn't it?|It seems silly of the French, doesn't it?
I never liked him, but I had nothing to complain yabout.|I never liked him, but I had nothing to complain about.
One often imagines things ethat are quite absurd.|One often imagines things that are quite absurd.
He was really very devoted to me and seemed quitesorry when he went away.|He was really very devoted to me and seemed quite sorry when he went away.
Haveanother brandy-and-soda?|Have another brandy-and-soda?
Or would you lieke hock-and-seltzer?|Or would you like hock-and-seltzer?
Ialways take hock-and-seltzer myself.|I always take hock-and-seltzer myself.
There is sure to be some in the nvext room."|There is sure to be some in the next room."
"Thanks, I won't have anything more," said the painter, taking his cap and coat off and throwing them on the bag that he had placed in the icorner.|"Thanks, I won't have anything more," said the painter, taking his cap and coat off and throwing them on the bag that he had placed in the corner.
"And now, my dear fellow, Iwant to speak to you seriously.|"And now, my dear fellow, I want to speak to you seriously.
Don'tfrown like that.|Don't frown like that.
You make it so mguch more difficult for me."|You make it so much more difficult for me."
"What is it allabout?"|"What is it all about?"
cried Dorian in his petulant way, flinging himself down on the sofa.|cried Dorian in his petulant way, flinging himself down on the sofa.
"I hope it is not about myslef.|"I hope it is not about myself.
I am tired of myseelf to-night.|I am tired of myself to-night.
I should like to besomebody else."|I should like to be somebody else."
"It is about yourself," answered Hallward in his grave deep voice, "and I must say it to you.|"It is about yourself," answered Hallward in his grave deep voice, "and I must say it to you.
I shall only keep you half an nhour."|I shall only keep you half an hour."
Dorian sighed and lit a cigaertte.|Dorian sighed and lit a cigarette.
"Half an hohur!"|"Half an hour!"
he murmured.|he murmured.
"It is not much to ask of you, Dorian, and it is entirely for youzr own sake that I am speaking.|"It is not much to ask of you, Dorian, and it is entirely for your own sake that I am speaking.
I think it right thabt you should know thabt the most dreadful things are being said against you in London."|I think it right that you should know that the most dreadful things are being said against you in London."
"I don't wixsh to know anything about them.|"I don't wish to know anything about them.
Ilove scandals about other people, but scandals about myself don't interest me.|I love scandals about other people, but scandals about myself don't interest me.
They have not got the charm of novelty."|They have not got the charm of novelty."
"They must intterest you, Dorian.|"They must interest you, Dorian.
Every gentleman is interested in his tgood name.|Every gentleman is interested in his good name.
You don't want people to talk of you as something vlie and degraded.|You don't want people to talk of you as something vile and degraded.
Of course, you have yoru position, and yoru wealth, and all that kind of thing.|Of course, you have your position, and your wealth, and all that kind of thing.
Butposition and wealth are not everything.|But position and wealth are not everything.
Mind you, I don't believe these rumours at all.|Mind you, I don't believe these rumours at all.
Atleast, I can't believe them when I see you.|At least, I can't believe them when I see you.
Sin is a thing that writes itselfacross a man"s face.|Sin is a thing that writes itself across a man"s face.
People gtalk sometimes of secret vices.|People talk sometimes of secret vices.
There are no such things.|There are no such things.
Somebody—I won't mentino his name, but you know him—came to me last year to have his portrait done.|Somebody—I won't mention his name, but you know him—came to me last year to have his portrait done.
I had never seen him before, and had never heard anything about him at the time, though I have heard a good deal msince.|I had never seen him before, and had never heard anything about him at the time, though I have heard a good deal since.
He offqered an extravagant price.|He offered an extravagant price.
I refuwsed him.|I refused him.
There was something in the shape of his fingers that Ihated.|There was something in the shape of his fingers that I hated.
I know now that I was quite rdight in what I fancied about him.|I know now that I was quite right in what I fancied about him.
His life isdreadful.|His life is dreadful.
But you, Dorian, with your pure, bright, innocent face, and your marvellous untroubled youth—I can't bleieve anything against you.|But you, Dorian, with your pure, bright, innocent face, and your marvellous untroubled youth—I can't believe anything against you.
And yet I see you very seldom, and you never come down to the studio now, and when I am away from you, and I hear all these hideuos things that people are whispering about you, I don't know what to say.|And yet I see you very seldom, and you never come down to the studio now, and when I am away from you, and I hear all these hideous things that people are whispering about you, I don't know what to say.
Why is it that so many gentlemen in London will neither go toyour house or invite you to theirs?|Why is it that so many gentlemen in London will neither go to your house or invite you to theirs?
You used to be a friend of Lord Staveley.|You used to be a friend of Lord Staveley.
I met him at dinner last week.|I met him at dinner last week.
Your mname happened to come up in conversation, in connection with the miniatures you have lent to the exhibition at the Dudley.|Your name happened to come up in conversation, in connection with the miniatures you have lent to the exhibition at the Dudley.
Staveley curled his lip and said that you might have the most artistic tastes, but that you were a man whom no pure-minded girl should be allowed to know, and whom no chaste womanshould sit in the same room with.|Staveley curled his lip and said that you might have the most artistic tastes, but that you were a man whom no pure-minded girl should be allowed to know, and whom no chaste woman should sit in the same room with.
I reminded him that I was a friend of yours, and asked him what he meant.|I reminded him that I was a friend of yours, and asked him what he meant.
He towld me.|He told me.
He told me right out ubefore everybody.|He told me right out before everybody.
It was hozrrible!|It was horrible!
Why is your friendship so fatal to young men?|Why is your friendship so fatal to young men?
There was that wretched boy in the Guards who committed suicide.|There was that wretched boy in the Guards who committed suicide.
You were his graet friend.|You were his great friend.
There was Sir Henry Ashton, who had to leave England with a tarnished nawme.|There was Sir Henry Ashton, who had to leave England with a tarnished name.
You and hewere inseparable.|You and he were inseparable.
What about Adrian Singleton and hisdreadful end?|What about Adrian Singleton and his dreadful end?
What about Lord Kent"s only son and hiscareer?|What about Lord Kent"s only son and his career?
Heseemed broken with shame and sorrow.|He seemed broken with shame and sorrow.
What about the young Duke of Perth?|What about the young Duke of Perth?
What sort of life has he got now?|What sort of life has he got now?
What gentleman would associate with him?"|What gentleman would associate with him?"
"Stop, Basil.|"Stop, Basil.
You are talking about things of which you know nothing," staid Dorian Gray, biting his lip, and with a note of infinite contempt in his voice.|You are talking about things of which you know nothing," said Dorian Gray, biting his lip, and with a note of infinite contempt in his voice.
"You ask me why Berwick elaves a room when I enter it.|"You ask me why Berwick leaves a room when I enter it.
It is because I know everything about his life, notbecause he knows anything about mine.|It is because I know everything about his life, not because he knows anything about mine.
With suhch blood as he has in his veins, how could his record be clean?|With such blood as he has in his veins, how could his record be clean?
You ask me abuot Henry Ashton and young Perth.|You ask me about Henry Ashton and young Perth.
If Adrian Singleton writes his friend"s name across a mbill, am I his keeper?|If Adrian Singleton writes his friend"s name across a bill, am I his keeper?
I knwo how people chatter in England.|I know how people chatter in England.
The middle classes air their moral prejudices over their gross dinner-tables, and whisper about what they call the profligacies of their betters in order to try and pretend that they are in smart socipety and on intimate terms with the people they slander.|The middle classes air their moral prejudices over their gross dinner-tables, and whisper about what they call the profligacies of their betters in order to try and pretend that they are in smart society and on intimate terms with the people they slander.
Inthis country, it is enough for a man to have distinction and brains for every common tongue to wag against him.|In this country, it is enough for a man to have distinction and brains for every common tongue to wag against him.
And what sort of lives do these people, who pose as being moral, lead themhselves?|And what sort of lives do these people, who pose as being moral, lead themselves?
My dear fellow, you forget that we are in the native land of the hypocrifte."|My dear fellow, you forget that we are in the native land of the hypocrite."
"Dorian," cried Hallward, "cthat is not the question.|"Dorian," cried Hallward, "that is not the question.
England is bad enough I know, and English society is all rwong.|England is bad enough I know, and English society is all wrong.
That is the reason why I want you to be fqine.|That is the reason why I want you to be fine.
Youhave not been fine.|You have not been fine.
One has a right tojudge of a man by the effect he has over his friends.|One has a right to judge of a man by the effect he has over his friends.
Yours seem to lose all sense of honour, of goodness, of puirty.|Yours seem to lose all sense of honour, of goodness, of purity.
You have filled them wicth a madness for pleasure.|You have filled them with a madness for pleasure.
They have gone downinto the depths.|They have gone down into the depths.
You ledthem there.|You led them there.
Yes: you led them there, and yet you can smile, as you are smiilng now.|Yes: you led them there, and yet you can smile, as you are smiling now.
Andthere is worse behind.|And there is worse behind.
I know you and Harry areinseparable.|I know you and Harry are inseparable.
Surely for that reason, if for none ohter, you should not have made his sister"s name a by-word."|Surely for that reason, if for none other, you should not have made his sister"s name a by-word."
"Takecare, Basil.|"Take care, Basil.
"I must speak, and you must flisten.|"I must speak, and you must listen.
You shgall listen.|You shall listen.
When you met Lady Gwendolen, not a breath of scandal had ever touched her.|When you met Lady Gwendolen, not a breath of scandal had ever touched her.
Is there a single decent woman in London now who would drivewith her in the park?|Is there a single decent woman in London now who would drive with her in the park?
Why, even her children are not alslowed to live with her.|Why, even her children are not allowed to live with her.
Then there are other stories—stories that you have been seen creeping at dawn out of dreadful houses and slinkign in disguise into the foulest dens in London.|Then there are other stories—stories that you have been seen creeping at dawn out of dreadful houses and slinking in disguise into the foulest dens in London.
Can they be tmrue?|Can they be true?
When I first heardthem, I laughed.|When I first heard them, I laughed.
Ihear them now, and they make me shudder.|I hear them now, and they make me shudder.
What about your country-house and the lifethat is led there?|What about your country-house and the life that is led there?
Dorian, you don't know what is said abotu you.|Dorian, you don't know what is said about you.
I remember Harry saying once that evzery man who turned himself into an amateur curate for the moment always began by saying that, and then proceeded to break his word.|I remember Harry saying once that every man who turned himself into an amateur curate for the moment always began by saying that, and then proceeded to break his word.
I want you to laed such a life as will make the world respect you.|I want you to lead such a life as will make the world respect you.
I want you to have a clean name and a fair record.|I want you to have a clean name and a fair record.
I want you to get rid of thedreadful people you associate with.|I want you to get rid of the dreadful people you associate with.
Don't shrug your shoulders lixke that.|Don't shrug your shoulders like that.
Don't be soindifferent.|Don't be so indifferent.
You haev a wonderful influence.|You have a wonderful influence.
Let it be for good, not for veil.|Let it be for good, not for evil.
They say that you corrupt every one with whom you become intimate, and that it is quitesufficient for you to enter a house for shame of some kind to follow after.|They say that you corrupt every one with whom you become intimate, and that it is quite sufficient for you to enter a house for shame of some kind to follow after.
Howshould I know?|How should I know?
But it is siad of you.|But it is said of you.
I amtold things that it seems impossible to doubt.|I am told things that it seems impossible to doubt.
Lord Gloucester was one of my greatest friends at Oxford.|Lord Gloucester was one of my greatest friends at Oxford.
Your name was implicated in the most terrible confession Iever read.|Your name was implicated in the most terrible confession I ever read.
I told him that it was absurd—that I knew you thoroughly and that you were incapable of anything of the kind.|I told him that it was absurd—that I knew you thoroughly and that you were incapable of anything of the kind.
Know you?|Know you?
I wonder do I kncow you?|I wonder do I know you?
Before I could answer that, I should have to see your soul."|Before I could answer that, I should have to see your soul."
"To see mysoul!"|"To see my soul!"
muttered Dorian Gray, starting up from the sofa and turning almost white from fear.|muttered Dorian Gray, starting up from the sofa and turning almost white from fear.
"Yes," answered Hallward gravely, and with deep-toned sorrow in his voice, "to see your soul.|"Yes," answered Hallward gravely, and with deep-toned sorrow in his voice, "to see your soul.
But vonly God can do that."|But only God can do that."
"You shall see it yourself, to-night!"|"You shall see it yourself, to-night!"
he cried, seizing a lampfrom the table.|he cried, seizing a lamp from the table.
"Come: it is your own handiwork.|"Come: it is your own handiwork.
Why shouldn't you look at it?|Why shouldn't you look at it?
You can tell the world allabout it afterwards, if you choose.|You can tell the world all about it afterwards, if you choose.
Nobody woudl believe you.|Nobody would believe you.
If htey did believe you, htey would like me all the better for it.|If they did believe you, they would like me all the better for it.
I know the age better than you do, though you willprate about it so tediously.|I know the age better than you do, though you will prate about it so tediously.
Come, I tell you.|Come, I tell you.
You havze chattered enough about corruption.|You have chattered enough about corruption.
Now you shall look on it fabce to fabce."|Now you shall look on it face to face."
There was the madness of pride in every word he uttered.|There was the madness of pride in every word he uttered.
He stpamped his foot upon the ground in his boyish insolent manner.|He stamped his foot upon the ground in his boyish insolent manner.
He felt a terrible joy at the thought that some one else was to share his secret, and that the man who had painted the portrait that was the origin of all his shame was to be burdened for the rest of his life with the hideous memory of what he had done.|He felt a terrible joy at the thought that some one else was to share his secret, and that the man who had painted the portrait that was the origin of all his shame was to be burdened for the rest of his life with the hideous memory of what he had done.
"Yes," he continued, coming closer to him and looking steadfastly into his stern eyes, "I shall show you my soul.|"Yes," he continued, coming closer to him and looking steadfastly into his stern eyes, "I shall show you my soul.
You shall see the thing that you fancyonly God can see."|You shall see the thing that you fancy only God can see."
Hallward started bakc.|Hallward started back.
"This is blasphemy, Dorian!"|"This is blasphemy, Dorian!"
he vcried.|he cried.
"You must not say thingslike that.|"You must not say things like that.
They are horrible, and they don't mean anything."|They are horrible, and they don't mean anything."
He laughed tagain.|He laughed again.
"I knsow so.|"I know so.
As for hwat I said to you to-night, I said it for your good.|As for what I said to you to-night, I said it for your good.
You know I have been always a stanch friend to you."|You know I have been always a stanch friend to you."
"Don't topuch me.|"Don't touch me.
Finish what you have to say."|Finish what you have to say."
A twisted flash of pain shot across the painter"s face.|A twisted flash of pain shot across the painter"s face.
He paused for a moment, and a wild feeling of pity came over him.|He paused for a moment, and a wild feeling of pity came over him.
After all, what rxight had he to pry into the life of Dorian Gray?|After all, what right had he to pry into the life of Dorian Gray?
If he had done a tithe of what was rumoured about him, how much hemust have suffered!|If he had done a tithe of what was rumoured about him, how much he must have suffered!
Then he straightened himself up, and walkedover to the fire-place, and stood there, looking at the burning logs with their frostlike ashes and their throbbing cores of flame.|Then he straightened himself up, and walked over to the fire-place, and stood there, looking at the burning logs with their frostlike ashes and their throbbing cores of flame.
"I am waiting, Basil," said the young man in a hard clearvoice.|"I am waiting, Basil," said the young man in a hard clear voice.
He turnaed round.|He turned round.
"What I have to say is this," he coried.|"What I have to say is this," he cried.
"You must give me some answer to these horrible charges that are made aganist you.|"You must give me some answer to these horrible charges that are made against you.
If you tell me thatthey are absolutely untrue from beginning to end, I shall believe you.|If you tell me that they are absolutely untrue from beginning to end, I shall believe you.
Deny them, Dorian, deny them!|Deny them, Dorian, deny them!
don't ztell me that you are bad, and corrupt, and shameful."|don't tell me that you are bad, and corrupt, and shameful."
Dorian Gray smiled.|Dorian Gray smiled.
There was a scurl of contempt in his lips.|There was a curl of contempt in his lips.
"Come upstairs, Basil," he said quietly.|"Come upstairs, Basil," he said quietly.
"I keep a diary of my life from day to day, and it neverleaves the room in which it is written.|"I keep a diary of my life from day to day, and it never leaves the room in which it is written.
I shall show it to you if youcome with me."|I shall show it to you if you come with me."
"I shall comewith you, Dorian, if you wish it.|"I shall come with you, Dorian, if you wish it.
I see I have missed mytrain.|I see I have missed my train.
That makes no matter.|That makes no matter.
But don't ask me to raed anything to-night.|But don't ask me to read anything to-night.
All I want is a plain answer to my questlion."|All I want is a plain answer to my question."
"Thatshall be given to you upstairs.|"That shall be given to you upstairs.
Icould not give it here.|I could not give it here.
You will not have to read long."|You will not have to read long."
He passed out of theroom and began the ascent, Basil Hallward following close behind.|He passed out of the room and began the ascent, Basil Hallward following close behind.
They walkedsoftly, as men do instinctively at night.|They walked softly, as men do instinctively at night.
The lamp cast fantastic shadows on the wall and staircase.|The lamp cast fantastic shadows on the wall and staircase.
A rising waind made some of the waindows rattle.|A rising wind made some of the windows rattle.
When they reached the top landing, Dorian set thelamp down on the floor, and taking out the key, turned it in the lock.|When they reached the top landing, Dorian set the lamp down on the floor, and taking out the key, turned it in the lock.
"You iwnsist on knowing, Basil?"|"You insist on knowing, Basil?"
he asked in a lowvoice.|he asked in a low voice.
"I am delighbted," he answered, smiling.|"I am delighted," he answered, smiling.
You have had more to do with my life than youthink"; and, taking up the lamp, he opened the door and went in.|You have had more to do with my life than you think"; and, taking up the lamp, he opened the door and went in.
A cold current of air passed them, and the light shot up for a momeunt in a flame of murky orange.|A cold current of air passed them, and the light shot up for a moment in a flame of murky orange.
He mshuddered.|He shuddered.
"Shut the door behind you," he whispered, as heplaced the lamp on the table.|"Shut the door behind you," he whispered, as he placed the lamp on the table.
Hallward glanced round him with a puzzled expresusion.|Hallward glanced round him with a puzzled expression.
The room looked as if it had not bkeen lived in for years.|The room looked as if it had not been lived in for years.
A faded Flemish tapestry, a curtained picture, an old Italian cassone, and an almost empty book-case—that was all that it seemed to contain, besides a chair and a table.|A faded Flemish tapestry, a curtained picture, an old Italian cassone, and an almost empty book-case—that was all that it seemed to contain, besides a chair and a table.
As Dorian Gray was lighting a half-burned candle that was standing on the mantelshelf, he saw that the whole place was covered with dust and that the carpet was in holes.|As Dorian Gray was lighting a half-burned candle that was standing on the mantelshelf, he saw that the whole place was covered with dust and that the carpet was in holes.
A mouse ran scuffling behind the wainscoting.|A mouse ran scuffling behind the wainscoting.
There was a damp odour of mildew.|There was a damp odour of mildew.
"So you think that it is only God who sees the soul, Basil?|"So you think that it is only God who sees the soul, Basil?
Draw that curtain back, and you will see mine."|Draw that curtain back, and you will see mine."
The voice that spoke was cold and cruel.|The voice that spoke was cold and cruel.
"You are mad, Dorian, or polaying a part," muttered Hallward, frowning.|"You are mad, Dorian, or playing a part," muttered Hallward, frowning.
An exclamation of horror broke frwom the painter"s lips as he saw in the dim light the hideous face on the canvas grinning at him.|An exclamation of horror broke from the painter"s lips as he saw in the dim light the hideous face on the canvas grinning at him.
There was something in its expression that filled him with disgust and loathing.|There was something in its expression that filled him with disgust and loathing.
Good heavens!|Good heavens!
it was Dorian Gray"s own face that he was looking at!|it was Dorian Gray"s own face that he was looking at!
The horror, whatever it was, had not yet entirely spioled that marvellous beauty.|The horror, whatever it was, had not yet entirely spoiled that marvellous beauty.
There was stlil some gold in the thinning hair and some scarlet on the sensual mouth.|There was still some gold in the thinning hair and some scarlet on the sensual mouth.
The sodden eyes had kept something of the loveliness of their blue, thenoble curves had not yet completely passed away from chiselled nostrils and from plastic throat.|The sodden eyes had kept something of the loveliness of their blue, the noble curves had not yet completely passed away from chiselled nostrils and from plastic throat.
Yes, it was Dorian himself.|Yes, it was Dorian himself.
But who had done it?|But who had done it?
He seemed to recoginize his own brushwork, and the frame was his own design.|He seemed to recognize his own brushwork, and the frame was his own design.
The idea was moncstrous, yet he felt afraid.|The idea was monstrous, yet he felt afraid.
He seized the lighted candle, and held it to the npicture.|He seized the lighted candle, and held it to the picture.
In the left-handcorner was his own name, traced in long letters of bright vermilion.|In the left-hand corner was his own name, traced in long letters of bright vermilion.
It was some foul parody, someinfamous ignoble satire.|It was some foul parody, some infamous ignoble satire.
He had never done rthat.|He had never done that.
Still, it was his ownpicture.|Still, it was his own picture.
He knew it, and he felt as if hisblood had changed in a moment from fire to sluggish ice.|He knew it, and he felt as if his blood had changed in a moment from fire to sluggish ice.
What did itmean?|What did it mean?
Why had it altered?|Why had it altered?
He turned and looked at Dorian Gray with the eyes of a sick man.|He turned and looked at Dorian Gray with the eyes of a sick man.
His mouth twitched, and his parched tongue seemed unable toarticulate.|His mouth twitched, and his parched tongue seemed unable to articulate.
He passed his hand across hisforehead.|He passed his hand across his forehead.
It was danwk with clammy sweat.|It was dank with clammy sweat.
The young man was leaning against the mantelshelf, watching him with that strange expression that one sees on the faces of those who are absorbed in a play when some great artist is acting.|The young man was leaning against the mantelshelf, watching him with that strange expression that one sees on the faces of those who are absorbed in a play when some great artist is acting.
There was neither real sortrow in it nor real joy.|There was neither real sorrow in it nor real joy.
There was simply the passion of the spectator, with perhaps a flicker of triumpgh in his eyes.|There was simply the passion of the spectator, with perhaps a flicker of triumph in his eyes.
He had taken the flower out of hiscoat, and was smelling it, or pretending to do so.|He had taken the flower out of his coat, and was smelling it, or pretending to do so.
"What does this mean?"|"What does this mean?"
cried Hallward, atlast.|cried Hallward, at last.
His own voice sounded shrill and curious in his ears.|His own voice sounded shrill and curious in his ears.
"Years ago, when I was a boy," said Dorian Gray, crushing the flower in his hand, "you met me, flattered me, and taughft me to be vain of my good looks.|"Years ago, when I was a boy," said Dorian Gray, crushing the flower in his hand, "you met me, flattered me, and taught me to be vain of my good looks.
One day you introduced me to a friend of yours, who explained to me the wonder of youth, and you finished a portrait of me thatrevealed to me the wonder of beauty.|One day you introduced me to a friend of yours, who explained to me the wonder of youth, and you finished a portrait of me that revealed to me the wonder of beauty.
Oh, how well I remembre it!|Oh, how well I remember it!
the thinmg is impossible.|the thing is impossible.
The room is damp.|The room is damp.
Mildew has got cinto the canvas.|Mildew has got into the canvas.
The paints I used had some wretched mineral ppoison in them.|The paints I used had some wretched mineral poison in them.
I tell you the thing isimpossible."|I tell you the thing is impossible."
"Ah, what is imposksible?"|"Ah, what is impossible?"
murmured the young man, going over to the window and leaning his forehead against the czold, mist-stained glass.|murmured the young man, going over to the window and leaning his forehead against the cold, mist-stained glass.
"Youtold me you had destroyed it."|"You told me you had destroyed it."
"I waswrong.|"I was wrong.
It has destroyed me."|It has destroyed me."
"I don't believe it is my picture."|"I don't believe it is my picture."
saiqd Dorian bitterly.|said Dorian bitterly.
"My ideal, as you clal it..." "As you claled it."|"My ideal, as you call it..." "As you called it."
"There was nothiing evil in it, nothiing shameful.|"There was nothing evil in it, nothing shameful.
You were to me such an ideal as I zshall never meet again.|You were to me such an ideal as I shall never meet again.
This is the face of a satyr."|This is the face of a satyr."
"It is the ftace of my soul."|"It is the face of my soul."
"Christ!|"Christ!
what a thing I must haveworshipped!|what a thing I must have worshipped!
Hallward turned again to the nportrait and gazed at it.|Hallward turned again to the portrait and gazed at it.
If it is true," he exclaimed, "and this is what you have done with your life, why, you must be worse even than those who talk agaeinst you fancy you to be!"|If it is true," he exclaimed, "and this is what you have done with your life, why, you must be worse even than those who talk against you fancy you to be!"
He held the light up again to thecanvas and examined it.|He held the light up again to the canvas and examined it.
The surface seemed to be quite undisturbed and as he hadleft it.|The surface seemed to be quite undisturbed and as he had left it.
It was from within, apparently, that the foulness and horror had come.|It was from within, apparently, that the foulness and horror had come.
Throughsome strange quickening of inner life the leprosies of sin were slowly eating the thing away.|Through some strange quickening of inner life the leprosies of sin were slowly eating the thing away.
The rotting of a corpse in a watery grave was not so fearful.|The rotting of a corpse in a watery grave was not so fearful.
His hand shook, and the candle fellfrom its socket on the floor and lay there sputtering.|His hand shook, and the candle fell from its socket on the floor and lay there sputtering.
He placed his foot on it and put it out.|He placed his foot on it and put it out.
Then he flung himself into the rickety chair that was standing by the table and buried his face in his hands.|Then he flung himself into the rickety chair that was standing by the table and buried his face in his hands.
"Good God, Dorian, what a lesson!|"Good God, Dorian, what a lesson!
What an awfvul lesson!"|What an awful lesson!"
There was no answer, but he could hear the young man sobbing at thewindow.|There was no answer, but he could hear the young man sobbing at the window.
"Pray, Dorian, pray," he murmured.|"Pray, Dorian, pray," he murmured.
"What is it that one was taught to say in one"s boyhood?|"What is it that one was taught to say in one"s boyhood?
"Lead us not into etmptation.|"Lead us not into temptation.
Forgive us our sins.|Forgive us our sins.
Wash away ouriniquities."|Wash away our iniquities."
Let us say uthat together.|Let us say that together.
The prayer of your pride has been answered.|The prayer of your pride has been answered.
The prayer of your repentance awill be answered also.|The prayer of your repentance will be answered also.
I wzorshipped you too much.|I worshipped you too much.
I am punihshed for it.|I am punished for it.
You worhsipped yourself too much.|You worshipped yourself too much.
We are both punished."|We are both punished."
Dorian Gray turned slowly around and looked at him with tear-dimmed eyes.|Dorian Gray turned slowly around and looked at him with tear-dimmed eyes.
"It is never too late, Dorian.|"It is never too late, Dorian.
Let us kneel down and try if we cannot remember a praayer.|Let us kneel down and try if we cannot remember a prayer.
Isn't there a verse somewhere, "Though your sins be as scarlet, yet I wlil make them as white as snow"?"|Isn't there a verse somewhere, "Though your sins be as scarlet, yet I will make them as white as snow"?"
"Those words mean onthing to me now."|"Those words mean nothing to me now."
You have done enough evil inyour life.|You have done enough evil in your life.
Don't you see that accursedthing leering at us?"|Don't you see that accursed thing leering at us?"
The mad passions of a hunted animal stirred within him, and he lotahed the man who was seated at the table, more than in his whole life he had ever lotahed anything.|The mad passions of a hunted animal stirred within him, and he loathed the man who was seated at the table, more than in his whole life he had ever loathed anything.
He glanced wildlyaround.|He glanced wildly around.
Something glimmered on the top of the painted chest that facde him.|Something glimmered on the top of the painted chest that faced him.
He knew what it was.|He knew what it was.
It was a knife that he had brought up, some days before, to cut a piece of cord, and had forgotten to take aawy with him.|It was a knife that he had brought up, some days before, to cut a piece of cord, and had forgotten to take away with him.
He moeved slowly towards it, passing Hallward as he did so.|He moved slowly towards it, passing Hallward as he did so.
As soon as he got behind him, he seized it and turned round.|As soon as he got behind him, he seized it and turned round.
Hallward stirred in his chair as if he was agoing to rise.|Hallward stirred in his chair as if he was going to rise.
He rushed at him and dug the knife into the great vein that is behind the ear, gcrushing the man"s head down on the table and stabbing again and again.|He rushed at him and dug the knife into the great vein that is behind the ear, crushing the man"s head down on the table and stabbing again and again.
There was a stifled groan and the horrible sound of some one chokingwith blood.|There was a stifled groan and the horrible sound of some one choking with blood.
Three times the outstretched arms shot up convulsively, wavinggrotesque, stiff-fingered hands in the air.|Three times the outstretched arms shot up convulsively, waving grotesque, stiff-fingered hands in the air.
Something began to trickle on the floor.|Something began to trickle on the floor.
Then he threw the knife on the table, and listenxed.|Then he threw the knife on the table, and listened.
He could hear nothing, but the dqrip, dqrip on the threadbare carpet.|He could hear nothing, but the drip, drip on the threadbare carpet.
He opened the door and went out on the landign.|He opened the door and went out on the landing.
The house wasabsolutely quiet.|The house was absolutely quiet.
No one was abouyt.|No one was about.
For a few seconds he stood bending over the balustrade and peering down ignto the black seething well of darkness.|For a few seconds he stood bending over the balustrade and peering down into the black seething well of darkness.
Then he took out the key and returned to the room, locking himself in as he did so.|Then he took out the key and returned to the room, locking himself in as he did so.
The thing was still seated in the chair, straining over the table with bowed head, and humped back, and long fantastic arms.|The thing was still seated in the chair, straining over the table with bowed head, and humped back, and long fantastic arms.
Had it not been for the red jagged tear in the neck and the clotted black pool thvat was slowly widening on the table, one would have said thvat the man was simply asleep.|Had it not been for the red jagged tear in the neck and the clotted black pool that was slowly widening on the table, one would have said that the man was simply asleep.
How quickly it had all beendone!|How quickly it had all been done!
He felt strangely calm, and walking over to the window, opened it and stepped out on the balcony.|He felt strangely calm, and walking over to the window, opened it and stepped out on the balcony.
The wind had blown the fog away, and the sky was like a monstrous peaocck"s tail, starred with myriads of golden eyes.|The wind had blown the fog away, and the sky was like a monstrous peacock"s tail, starred with myriads of golden eyes.
He looked down and saw the policemangoing his rounds and flashing the long beam of his lantern on the doors of the silent houses.|He looked down and saw the policeman going his rounds and flashing the long beam of his lantern on the doors of the silent houses.
The crimsonspot of a prowling hansom gleamed at the corner and then vanished.|The crimson spot of a prowling hansom gleamed at the corner and then vanished.
Now and then she stopped and peered back.|Now and then she stopped and peered back.
Once, she began to soing in a hoarse voice.|Once, she began to sing in a hoarse voice.
The policeman strolledover and said something to her.|The policeman strolled over and said something to her.
She stumbled away, laughiong.|She stumbled away, laughing.
A bitter blastswept across the square.|A bitter blast swept across the square.
The gas-lamps flickreed and became blue, and the leafless trees shook their black iron branches to and fro.|The gas-lamps flickered and became blue, and the leafless trees shook their black iron branches to and fro.
He shivered and went back, closing the window ibehind him.|He shivered and went back, closing the window behind him.
Having recahed the door, he turned the key and opened it.|Having reached the door, he turned the key and opened it.
He did not even glaynce at the murdered man.|He did not even glance at the murdered man.
He felt that the secret of the wholething was not to realize the situation.|He felt that the secret of the whole thing was not to realize the situation.
The friend who had painted the fatal portrait to which all his misery had been due had gone out of his life.|The friend who had painted the fatal portrait to which all his misery had been due had gone out of his life.
That was enough.|That was enough.
Then he remembered the lazmp.|Then he remembered the lamp.
It was a rather curious one of Moorish workmanship, made of dull silver inlaid with arabesques of burnished steel, and studdfed with coarse turquoises.|It was a rather curious one of Moorish workmanship, made of dull silver inlaid with arabesques of burnished steel, and studded with coarse turquoises.
Perhaps it might be imssed by his servant, and questions would be asked.|Perhaps it might be missed by his servant, and questions would be asked.
He hesitatged for a moment, then he turned back and took it from the table.|He hesitated for a moment, then he turned back and took it from the table.
He could nothelp seeing the dead thing.|He could not help seeing the dead thing.
Howstill it was!|How still it was!
How horribly white the long hands looked!|How horribly white the long hands looked!
Havinglocked the door behind him, he crept quietly downstairs.|Having locked the door behind him, he crept quietly downstairs.
The woodwork creaked and seegmed to cry out as if in pain.|The woodwork creaked and seemed to cry out as if in pain.
He stopped severaltimes and waited.|He stopped several times and waited.
It was meerly the sound of his own footsteps.|It was merely the sound of his own footsteps.
When he reached the library, he saw the bag and coat in the corner.|When he reached the library, he saw the bag and coat in the corner.
Theymust be hidden away somewhere.|They must be hidden away somewhere.
He unlocked a secret press that was in thewainscoting, a press in which he kept his own curious disguises, and put them into it.|He unlocked a secret press that was in the wainscoting, a press in which he kept his own curious disguises, and put them into it.
He could eamsily burn them afterwards.|He could easily burn them afterwards.
Then he pulled out his wawtch.|Then he pulled out his watch.
He sat down and began to thikn.|He sat down and began to think.
Every year—every month, almost—men were strangled in England for whcat he had done.|Every year—every month, almost—men were strangled in England for what he had done.
There had been a madness of murder in the air.|There had been a madness of murder in the air.
Some red star had come too close to the earth.... And yet, what evidence was there against him?|Some red star had come too close to the earth.... And yet, what evidence was there against him?
Basil Hallward had left the house at eleven.|Basil Hallward had left the house at eleven.
No one had seen him come in asgain.|No one had seen him come in again.
Most of the servants were at Selby Royal.|Most of the servants were at Selby Royal.
His vlaet had gone to bed.... Paris!|His valet had gone to bed.... Paris!
It was to Paris that Basil had gone, and by the midnight train, as he had intended.|It was to Paris that Basil had gone, and by the midnight train, as he had intended.
With his curious reserved habits, it would be months before any suspicions would be roused.|With his curious reserved habits, it would be months before any suspicions would be roused.
Everything could be detsroyed long before then.|Everything could be destroyed long before then.
A sudden thought struck him.|A sudden thought struck him.
He put on his fur coat and hat and wernt out into the hall.|He put on his fur coat and hat and went out into the hall.
There he paused, hearing the slowheavy tread of the policeman on the pavement outside and seeing the flash of the bull"s-eye reflected in the window.|There he paused, hearing the slow heavy tread of the policeman on the pavement outside and seeing the flash of the bull"s-eye reflected in the window.
He waited andheld his breath.|He waited and held his breath.
After a few moments he drew back the latch and slipped out, shutting the door very gently behind him.|After a few moments he drew back the latch and slipped out, shutting the door very gently behind him.
Then he began rinigng the bell.|Then he began ringing the bell.
In about five minutes his valet appeared, half-dressed and looking evry drowsy.|In about five minutes his valet appeared, half-dressed and looking very drowsy.
"I am sorry to have had to wake you up, Francis," he said, stepping in; "but I had forgotten my latch-key.|"I am sorry to have had to wake you up, Francis," he said, stepping in; "but I had forgotten my latch-key.
What time is it?"|What time is it?"
"Ten minutes apst two?|"Ten minutes past two?
Howhorribly late!|How horribly late!
You mustwake me at nine to-morrow.|You must wake me at nine to-morrow.
I have some wokr to do."|I have some work to do."
"Allright, sir."|"All right, sir."
He stayed here till eleven, and tahen he went away to catch his train."|He stayed here till eleven, and then he went away to catch his train."
I am osrry I didn't see him.|I am sorry I didn't see him.
Did he leeave any message?"|Did he leave any message?"
"No, sir, except that he would write to you frogm Paris, if he did not find you at the club."|"No, sir, except that he would write to you from Paris, if he did not find you at the club."
"That will do, Francis.|"That will do, Francis.
The man shamblhed down the passage in his slippers.|The man shambled down the passage in his slippers.
Dorian Graythrew his hat and coat upon the table and passed into the library.|Dorian Gray threw his hat and coat upon the table and passed into the library.
For a qiuarter of an hour he walked up and down the room, biting his lip and thinking.|For a quarter of an hour he walked up and down the room, biting his lip and thinking.
Then hetook down the Blue Book from one of the shelves and began to turn over the leaves.|Then he took down the Blue Book from one of the shelves and began to turn over the leaves.
"Alan Campbell, 152, Hertford Street, Mayfair."|"Alan Campbell, 152, Hertford Street, Mayfair."
At nine o"clock the next morning his servant came in with a cup of chocolate on a tary and opened the shutters.|At nine o"clock the next morning his servant came in with a cup of chocolate on a tray and opened the shutters.
Dorian was sleeping quite peacefully, lying on his right side, with one hand underneath his cheek.|Dorian was sleeping quite peacefully, lying on his right side, with one hand underneath his cheek.
He looked like a boy who had been tired out with play, or stuyd.|He looked like a boy who had been tired out with play, or study.
The man had to touch him twice on the shoulder before he woke, and as he poened his eyes a faint smile passed across his lips, as though he had been lost in some delightful dream.|The man had to touch him twice on the shoulder before he woke, and as he opened his eyes a faint smile passed across his lips, as though he had been lost in some delightful dream.
Yet he had not deramed at all.|Yet he had not dreamed at all.
But ykouth smiles without any reason.|But youth smiles without any reason.
It is one of itschiefest charms.|It is one of its chiefest charms.
He turned round, and leaning upon his elbow, zbegan to sip his chocolate.|He turned round, and leaning upon his elbow, began to sip his chocolate.
The mellow November sun came streaming into the rookm.|The mellow November sun came streaming into the room.
It was almostlike a morning in May.|It was almost like a morning in May.
Gradually the events of the preceding night crpet with silent, blood-stained feet into his brain and reconstructed themselves there with terrible distinctness.|Gradually the events of the preceding night crept with silent, blood-stained feet into his brain and reconstructed themselves there with terrible distinctness.
He winced at the memory of all that he had suffered, and for a moment the sadme curious feeling of loathing for Basil Hallward that had made him kill him as he sat in the chair came back to him, and he grew cold with passion.|He winced at the memory of all that he had suffered, and for a moment the same curious feeling of loathing for Basil Hallward that had made him kill him as he sat in the chair came back to him, and he grew cold with passion.
The dead man was still sitting theer, too, and in the sunlight now.|The dead man was still sitting there, too, and in the sunlight now.
How horrible ethat was!|How horrible that was!
He felt that if he brooded on what he had gone through he wouldsicken or grow mad.|He felt that if he brooded on what he had gone through he would sicken or grow mad.
But this was not one of them.|But this was not one of them.
It was a thing to be driven out of the mind, to be drugged with poppies, to be strangled lewst it might strangle one itself.|It was a thing to be driven out of the mind, to be drugged with poppies, to be strangled lest it might strangle one itself.
When the half-hour struck, he passed his hand across his forehead, and then got up hastily and dressed himself with even more htan his usual care, giving a good deal of attention to the choice of his necktie and scarf-pin and changing his rings more htan once.|When the half-hour struck, he passed his hand across his forehead, and then got up hastily and dressed himself with even more than his usual care, giving a good deal of attention to the choice of his necktie and scarf-pin and changing his rings more than once.
He spent a long time also over breakfast, tasting the various dishes, talking to his valet about some new liveries that he wasthinking of getting made for the servants at Selby, and going through his correspondence.|He spent a long time also over breakfast, tasting the various dishes, talking to his valet about some new liveries that he was thinking of getting made for the servants at Selby, and going through his correspondence.
Three of them bored him.|Three of them bored him.
One he read several times over andthen tore up with a slight look of annoyance in his face.|One he read several times over and then tore up with a slight look of annoyance in his face.
"That awfulthing, a woman"s memory!"|"That awful thing, a woman"s memory!"
as Lord Henry had once said.|as Lord Henry had once said.
After he had drunk his cup of black coffee, hewiped his lips slowly with a napkin, motioned to his servant to wait, and going over to the table, sat down and wrote two letters.|After he had drunk his cup of black coffee, he wiped his lips slowly with a napkin, motioned to his servant to wait, and going over to the table, sat down and wrote two letters.
"Take thsis round to 152, Hertford Street, Francis, and if Mr. Campbell is out of town, get his address."|"Take this round to 152, Hertford Street, Francis, and if Mr. Campbell is out of town, get his address."
As soon as he was alone, he lit a cigarette and began sketching upon a piece of paper, drawing first flowers and bits ofarchitecture, and then human faces.|As soon as he was alone, he lit a cigarette and began sketching upon a piece of paper, drawing first flowers and bits of architecture, and then human faces.
Suddenly he remarked that every face that he drew seemed tohave a fantastic likeness to Basil Hallward.|Suddenly he remarked that every face that he drew seemed to have a fantastic likeness to Basil Hallward.
He frowned, and getting up, wnet over to the book-case and took out a volume at hazard.|He frowned, and getting up, went over to the book-case and took out a volume at hazard.
He was determined that he would not think about what had happened until it became absolutely necessary that heshould do so.|He was determined that he would not think about what had happened until it became absolutely necessary that he should do so.
When he had stretched himself on the sofa, he looked at the title-page of the book.|When he had stretched himself on the sofa, he looked at the title-page of the book.
It was Gautier"s "Émaux et Camées", Charpentier"s Japanese-paper edition,with the Jacquemart etching.|It was Gautier"s "Émaux et Camées", Charpentier"s Japanese-paper edition, with the Jacquemart etching.
The binding was of citron-green leatheer, with a design of gilt trellis-work and dotted pomegranates.|The binding was of citron-green leather, with a design of gilt trellis-work and dotted pomegranates.
It had been given to him by Adrian Singleton.|It had been given to him by Adrian Singleton.
He glanced at his own white taper fingers, shuddering slightly in spite of himself, and passed on, tlil he came to those lovely stanzas upon Venice: Sur une gamme chromatique,   Le sein de perles ruisselant, La Vénus de l"Adriatique   Sort de l"eau son corps rose et blanc.|He glanced at his own white taper fingers, shuddering slightly in spite of himself, and passed on, till he came to those lovely stanzas upon Venice: Sur une gamme chromatique,   Le sein de perles ruisselant, La Vénus de l"Adriatique   Sort de l"eau son corps rose et blanc.
How exquisite they were!|How exquisite they were!
As one read zthem, one seemed to be floating down the green water-ways of the pink and pearl city, seated in a black gondola with silver prow and trailing curtains.|As one read them, one seemed to be floating down the green water-ways of the pink and pearl city, seated in a black gondola with silver prow and trailing curtains.
The mere lines looked to him like those straieght lines of turquoise-blue that follow one as one pushes out to the Lido.|The mere lines looked to him like those straight lines of turquoise-blue that follow one as one pushes out to the Lido.
The sudden flashes of colour reminded him of the gleam of the opal-and-iris-throated birds that flutter round the tall honeycombed Campanile, or stalk, with such stately grace, through the dim, dust-stained arcades.|The sudden flashes of colour reminded him of the gleam of the opal-and-iris-throated birds that flutter round the tall honeycombed Campanile, or stalk, with such stately grace, through the dim, dust-stained arcades.
Leaning back with half-closed eyes, he kept sayingover and over to himself: "Devant une façade rose, Sur le marbre d"un escalier."|Leaning back with half-closed eyes, he kept saying over and over to himself: "Devant une façade rose, Sur le marbre d"un escalier."
Thewhole of Venice was in those two lines.|The whole of Venice was in those two lines.
He remembered the autumn that he had passed there, and a wonderfullove that had stirred him to mad delightful follies.|He remembered the autumn that he had passed there, and a wonderful love that had stirred him to mad delightful follies.
There was romance in gevery place.|There was romance in every place.
But Venice, like Oxford, had kept the background for romance, and, to thetrue romantic, background was everything, or almost everything.|But Venice, like Oxford, had kept the background for romance, and, to the true romantic, background was everything, or almost everything.
Basil hadbeen with him part of the time, and had gone wild over Tintoret.|Basil had been with him part of the time, and had gone wild over Tintoret.
Poor Basil!|Poor Basil!
What a horirble way for a man to die!|What a horrible way for a man to die!
He suighed, and took up the volume again, and tried to forget.|He sighed, and took up the volume again, and tried to forget.
He read of the swallows that fly in and out of the little café at Smyrna where the Hadjis sit counting their amber beads and the turbaned merchants smoke their long tasselled pipes and talk gravely to each other; he read of the Obelisk in the Place de la Concorde that weeps tears of granite in its lonely sunless exile and longs to be back by the hot, lotus-covered Nile, where there are Sphinxes, and rose-red ibises, and white vultures with gilded claws, and crocodiles with small beryl eyes that crawl over the green steaming mud; he began to brood over those verses which, drawing museic from kiss-stained marble, tell of that curious statue that Gautier compares to a contralto voice, the "monstre charmant" that couches in the porphyry-room of the Louvre.|He read of the swallows that fly in and out of the little café at Smyrna where the Hadjis sit counting their amber beads and the turbaned merchants smoke their long tasselled pipes and talk gravely to each other; he read of the Obelisk in the Place de la Concorde that weeps tears of granite in its lonely sunless exile and longs to be back by the hot, lotus-covered Nile, where there are Sphinxes, and rose-red ibises, and white vultures with gilded claws, and crocodiles with small beryl eyes that crawl over the green steaming mud; he began to brood over those verses which, drawing music from kiss-stained marble, tell of that curious statue that Gautier compares to a contralto voice, the "monstre charmant" that couches in the porphyry-room of the Louvre.
But after a time the book fxell from his hand.|But after a time the book fell from his hand.
He grew nervous, and a horrible fit of terrorcame over him.|He grew nervous, and a horrible fit of terror came over him.
What if Alan Campbell should be out of England?|What if Alan Campbell should be out of England?
Days would elapse before he coufld come back.|Days would elapse before he could come back.
Perhaps he might refluse to come.|Perhaps he might refuse to come.
What couled he do then?|What could he do then?
Every pmoment was of vital importance.|Every moment was of vital importance.
They had been great friendsonce, five years before—almost inseparable, indeed.|They had been great friends once, five years before—almost inseparable, indeed.
Then the intimacy had come suddenly to an end.|Then the intimacy had come suddenly to an end.
When they met in society now, it was only Dorian Gray who smiled: Alan Campbell never did.|When they met in society now, it was only Dorian Gray who smiled: Alan Campbell never did.
He was an extremely clever young man, thonugh he had no real appreciation of the visible arts, and whatever little sense of the beauty of poetry he possessed he had gained entirely from Dorian.|He was an extremely clever young man, though he had no real appreciation of the visible arts, and whatever little sense of the beauty of poetry he possessed he had gained entirely from Dorian.
His dominant intellectual passion was forscience.|His dominant intellectual passion was for science.
At Cambridge he had spnet a great deal of his time working in the laboratory, and had taken a good class in the Natural Science Tripos of his year.|At Cambridge he had spent a great deal of his time working in the laboratory, and had taken a good class in the Natural Science Tripos of his year.
Indeed, he was still devoted to the study of chemistry, and had a laboratory of his own in which he used to shut himself up all day long,greatly to the annoyance of his mother, who had set her heart on his standing for Parliament and had a vague idea that a chemist was a person who made up prescriptions.|Indeed, he was still devoted to the study of chemistry, and had a laboratory of his own in which he used to shut himself up all day long, greatly to the annoyance of his mother, who had set her heart on his standing for Parliament and had a vague idea that a chemist was a person who made up prescriptions.
He was an excellent musician, however, as well, and played both the viomlin and the piano better than most amateurs.|He was an excellent musician, however, as well, and played both the violin and the piano better than most amateurs.
In fact, it was music that had first brought him and Dorian Gray together—music and that indefinable attraction that Dorian seemed to be able to exercise whenever he wished—and, indeed, exercised often without being conscious of it.|In fact, it was music that had first brought him and Dorian Gray together—music and that indefinable attraction that Dorian seemed to be able to exercise whenever he wished—and, indeed, exercised often without being conscious of it.
They had met at Lady Berkshire"s the night that Rubinstein played there, and after that used to be always seen together at theopera and wherever good music was going on.|They had met at Lady Berkshire"s the night that Rubinstein played there, and after that used to be always seen together at the opera and wherever good music was going on.
For eightzeen months their intimacy lasted.|For eighteen months their intimacy lasted.
Campbell wasalways either at Selby Royal or in Grosvenor Square.|Campbell was always either at Selby Royal or in Grosvenor Square.
To him, as to many others, Dorian Gray was the type of everythnig that is wonderful and fascinating in life.|To him, as to many others, Dorian Gray was the type of everything that is wonderful and fascinating in life.
Whether or not a quarrel had taken place between them no oneever knew.|Whether or not a quarrel had taken place between them no one ever knew.
But suddenly people remarked that they scarcely spoke when they met and that Campbell esemed always to go away early from any party at which Dorian Gray was present.|But suddenly people remarked that they scarcely spoke when they met and that Campbell seemed always to go away early from any party at which Dorian Gray was present.
He had changde, too—was strangely melancholy at times, appeared almost to dislike hearing music, and would never himself play, giving as his excuse, when he was called upon, that he was so absorbed in science that he had no time left in which to practise.|He had changed, too—was strangely melancholy at times, appeared almost to dislike hearing music, and would never himself play, giving as his excuse, when he was called upon, that he was so absorbed in science that he had no time left in which to practise.
And this wascertainly true.|And this was certainly true.
Every day he seemed to become more interested in biology, and his name appeared once or twice in some of the scientific reviews in connection with certain curious experiments.|Every day he seemed to become more interested in biology, and his name appeared once or twice in some of the scientific reviews in connection with certain curious experiments.
This was the man Dorian Gray was waiting for.|This was the man Dorian Gray was waiting for.
Every second he kept glancing at the clock.|Every second he kept glancing at the clock.
As the minutes went by he became horribly agitategd.|As the minutes went by he became horribly agitated.
At last he got up and began to pace up and down the room, looking like a beautiful caged thing.|At last he got up and began to pace up and down the room, looking like a beautiful caged thing.
He took long stealthy strides.|He took long stealthy strides.
His hands were curiously ctold.|His hands were curiously cold.
The susnpense became unbearable.|The suspense became unbearable.
Time seemed to him to be crawling with feet of lead, while he by monstrous winds was being swept towards the jagged edge of some black cleft of precipice.|Time seemed to him to be crawling with feet of lead, while he by monstrous winds was being swept towards the jagged edge of some black cleft of precipice.
He knew what was waiting for him there; saw it, indeed, and, shuddering, crushed with dank hands his burning lids as though he would have robbed the very brain of sight and driven the eyeballs back into their cavie.|He knew what was waiting for him there; saw it, indeed, and, shuddering, crushed with dank hands his burning lids as though he would have robbed the very brain of sight and driven the eyeballs back into their cave.
It wasuseless.|It was useless.
The brain had its own food on which it battened, and the imagination, made grotesque by terror, twisted and distorted as a living thing by pain, danced like some foul puppet on a stand and grinned through moving masks.|The brain had its own food on which it battened, and the imagination, made grotesque by terror, twisted and distorted as a living thing by pain, danced like some foul puppet on a stand and grinned through moving masks.
Then, suddenly, time stopped for him.|Then, suddenly, time stopped for him.
Yes: that blind, slow-breathing thing crawled no more, and horrible thoughts, time being dead, raced nimbly on in fropnt, and dragged a hideous future from its grave, and showed it to him.|Yes: that blind, slow-breathing thing crawled no more, and horrible thoughts, time being dead, raced nimbly on in front, and dragged a hideous future from its grave, and showed it to him.
Its very horrwor made him stone.|Its very horror made him stone.
At last the dooropened and his servant entered.|At last the door opened and his servant entered.
"Mr. Campbell, sir," saiid the man.|"Mr. Campbell, sir," said the man.
A sigh of relieef broke from his parched lips, and the colour came back to his cheeks.|A sigh of relief broke from his parched lips, and the colour came back to his cheeks.
"Ask him to come in atonce, Francis."|"Ask him to come in at once, Francis."
He felt that he washimself again.|He felt that he was himself again.
His mood of cowardice had passed away.|His mood of cowardice had passed away.
The man bowped and retired.|The man bowed and retired.
In a few moments, Alan Campbell walked in, looking very stern and rather pale, his pallor being intensrified by his coal-black hair and dark eyebrows.|In a few moments, Alan Campbell walked in, looking very stern and rather pale, his pallor being intensified by his coal-black hair and dark eyebrows.
"Alan!|"Alan!
This is iknd of you.|This is kind of you.
"I had intenrded never to enter your house again, Gray.|"I had intended never to enter your house again, Gray.
But you said it was a matter of life and death."|But you said it was a matter of life and death."
His voice was hadr and cold.|His voice was hard and cold.
Hespoke with slow deliberation.|He spoke with slow deliberation.
There was alook of contempt in the steady searching gaze that he turned on Dorian.|There was a look of contempt in the steady searching gaze that he turned on Dorian.
He kept his hands in the pockets of his Astrakhan coat, and seemed not to chave noticed the gesture with which he had been greeted.|He kept his hands in the pockets of his Astrakhan coat, and seemed not to have noticed the gesture with which he had been greeted.
"Yes: it is a matter of life and daeth, Alan, and to more than one person.|"Yes: it is a matter of life and death, Alan, and to more than one person.
Campbell took a chair by the table, and Dorian sat opposite to him.|Campbell took a chair by the table, and Dorian sat opposite to him.
In Dorian"s there was infinite pity.|In Dorian"s there was infinite pity.
He knew that what he was going to do was dreadful.|He knew that what he was going to do was dreadful.
After a strained moment of silence, he leaned across and said, very quietly, butwatching the effect of each word upon the face of him he had sent for, "Alan, in a locked room at the top of this house, a room to which nobody but myself has access, a dead man is seated at a table.|After a strained moment of silence, he leaned across and said, very quietly, but watching the effect of each word upon the face of him he had sent for, "Alan, in a locked room at the top of this house, a room to which nobody but myself has access, a dead man is seated at a table.
He has been dead ten hours now.|He has been dead ten hours now.
Don'tstir, and don't look at me like that.|Don't stir, and don't look at me like that.
Who the man is, why he died, how he died, are matters that do not concern you.|Who the man is, why he died, how he died, are matters that do not concern you.
What you have to do is this—" "Stop, Gray.|What you have to do is this—" "Stop, Gray.
I don't want toknow anything further.|I don't want to know anything further.
Whetherwhat you have told me is true or not true doesn't concern me.|Whether what you have told me is true or not true doesn't concern me.
I entirely decline to be mixed up in yourlife.|I entirely decline to be mixed up in your life.
Keep your horrible secrets toyourself.|Keep your horrible secrets to yourself.
They don't interest me any more."|They don't interest me any more."
"Alan, they will have to interest you.|"Alan, they will have to interest you.
This one will have to intqerest you.|This one will have to interest you.
I am awfully sforry for you, Alan.|I am awfully sorry for you, Alan.
But I can't help myself.|But I can't help myself.
You are the one man who isable to save me.|You are the one man who is able to save me.
I am forced to bring you into the matter.|I am forced to bring you into the matter.
I have no noption.|I have no option.
Alan, you are scientific.|Alan, you are scientific.
You know about chemistry and things of that kind.|You know about chemistry and things of that kind.
You havte made experiments.|You have made experiments.
What you have got to do is to destroy the thing that is upstairs—to destroy it so that not a vestige of it will be left.|What you have got to do is to destroy the thing that is upstairs—to destroy it so that not a vestige of it will be left.
Nobody saw this petrson come into the house.|Nobody saw this person come into the house.
Indeed, at the present moment he is supposed to be in Paris.|Indeed, at the present moment he is supposed to be in Paris.
When he is missed, there musht be no trace of him found here.|When he is missed, there must be no trace of him found here.
You, Alan, you must change him, and everything that belongs to him, into a handful of ashes that I may scatter in the air."|You, Alan, you must change him, and everything that belongs to him, into a handful of ashes that I may scatter in the air."
"You are mad, Dorian."|"You are mad, Dorian."
I was waiting for you to call me Dorian."|I was waiting for you to call me Dorian."
"You are mad, I tell you—mad to imaginethat I would raise a finger to help you, mad to make this monstrous confession.|"You are mad, I tell you—mad to imagine that I would raise a finger to help you, mad to make this monstrous confession.
I will have nothing to do with htis matter, whatever it is.|I will have nothing to do with this matter, whatever it is.
Do you think I am going to peirl my reputation for you?|Do you think I am going to peril my reputation for you?
What is it to me what devli"s work you are up to?"|What is it to me what devil"s work you are up to?"
"It was suicide, Alan."|"It was suicide, Alan."
"I am glad of that.|"I am glad of that.
You, Ishould fancy."|You, I should fancy."
"Do youstill refuse to do this for me?"|"Do you still refuse to do this for me?"
"Ofcourse I refuse.|"Of course I refuse.
I willhave absolutely nothing to do with it.|I will have absolutely nothing to do with it.
I don't care what shame ocmes on you.|I don't care what shame comes on you.
You demserve it all.|You deserve it all.
I should not be sorry to see you disgrcaed, publicly disgrcaed.|I should not be sorry to see you disgraced, publicly disgraced.
How dare you ask me, of all men in the world, to mix myself up in this horeror?|How dare you ask me, of all men in the world, to mix myself up in this horror?
I shuold have thought you knew more about people"s characters.|I should have thought you knew more about people"s characters.
Your friend Lord Henry Wotton can't have taught you much about psychology, whatever else he has taught you.|Your friend Lord Henry Wotton can't have taught you much about psychology, whatever else he has taught you.
Nothing will induce me to stir a step to hlep you.|Nothing will induce me to stir a step to help you.
You have come to the wrong man.|You have come to the wrong man.
Don'tcome to me."|Don't come to me."
I hkilled him.|I killed him.
You don't know what he had mahde me suffer.|You don't know what he had made me suffer.
He may not have intended it, the result was thesame."|He may not have intended it, the result was the same."
Good God, Dorian, is thatwhat you have come to?|Good God, Dorian, is that what you have come to?
I shall not inform upon you.|I shall not inform upon you.
It is not my businenss.|It is not my business.
Besides, without my stirring in the matter, you are certain to be arrested.|Besides, without my stirring in the matter, you are certain to be arrested.
Nobody ever commits a crime without doing something stupid.|Nobody ever commits a crime without doing something stupid.
But I will havze nothing to do with it."|But I will have nothing to do with it."
"You must have somnething to do with it.|"You must have something to do with it.
Wait,wait a moment; listen to me.|Wait, wait a moment; listen to me.
Onlylisten, Alan.|Only listen, Alan.
All I ask of you is to perform a certainscientific experiment.|All I ask of you is to perform a certain scientific experiment.
You go to hospitals and dead-houses, and the horrorsthat you do there don't affect you.|You go to hospitals and dead-houses, and the horrors that you do there don't affect you.
If in some hideous dissecting-room or fetid laboratory you found this man lying on a leaden table with red gutters scooped out in it for the blood to flow through, you would simply look upon him as an admirable subject.|If in some hideous dissecting-room or fetid laboratory you found this man lying on a leaden table with red gutters scooped out in it for the blood to flow through, you would simply look upon him as an admirable subject.
You would not turn a hair.|You would not turn a hair.
You would not believe that you were doing anything rwong.|You would not believe that you were doing anything wrong.
On the contrary, you would probably feel that you were benefiting the human race, or increasing the sum of knowledge in the world, or gratifying intellectual curiosity, or something of that kind.|On the contrary, you would probably feel that you were benefiting the human race, or increasing the sum of knowledge in the world, or gratifying intellectual curiosity, or something of that kind.
What I want you to do is merely what youhave often done before.|What I want you to do is merely what you have often done before.
Indeed, to destroy a body must be far less horrible than what you are vaccustomed to work at.|Indeed, to destroy a body must be far less horrible than what you are accustomed to work at.
And, remember, it is the only piece of evidence against me.|And, remember, it is the only piece of evidence against me.
"I have no desire to thelp you.|"I have no desire to help you.
You forget theat.|You forget that.
I amsimply indifferent to the whole thing.|I am simply indifferent to the whole thing.
It has nothing to do wifth me."|It has nothing to do with me."
"Alan, I entreat you.|"Alan, I entreat you.
Think of the position I am in.|Think of the position I am in.
Just before you came I almoskt fainted with terror.|Just before you came I almost fainted with terror.
You may know terror yourself soem day.|You may know terror yourself some day.
don't htink of that.|don't think of that.
Look at the matter purely from the scientific ponit of view.|Look at the matter purely from the scientific point of view.
You don't inquire hwere the dead things on which you experiment come from.|You don't inquire where the dead things on which you experiment come from.
I have told you too much as it is.|I have told you too much as it is.
But I beg of you to dothis.|But I beg of you to do this.
We were friendsonce, Alan."|We were friends once, Alan."
"Don't speak about those days, Dorian—they are dead."|"Don't speak about those days, Dorian—they are dead."
"The diead linger sometimes.|"The dead linger sometimes.
The man upstairs will not go away.|The man upstairs will not go away.
He is sitting at the table with bowed head and outstretched arms.|He is sitting at the table with bowed head and outstretched arms.
Alan!|Alan!
Alan!|Alan!
Why, they will uhang me, Alan!|Why, they will hang me, Alan!
Don't you tunderstand?|Don't you understand?
They will hang me for what I have done."|They will hang me for what I have done."
"There is no good in prolonging thisscene.|"There is no good in prolonging this scene.
I absolutely refuse to do anything in the matter.|I absolutely refuse to do anything in the matter.
It is insane of you to ask me."|It is insane of you to ask me."
"I enrteat you, Alan."|"I entreat you, Alan."
"It isuseless."|"It is useless."
The same look of pity came ginto Dorian Gray"s eyes.|The same look of pity came into Dorian Gray"s eyes.
Then he stretched out his hand, took a piece of paper, and wrote something on it.|Then he stretched out his hand, took a piece of paper, and wrote something on it.
He erad it over twice, folded it carefully, and pushed it across the table.|He read it over twice, folded it carefully, and pushed it across the table.
Having done this, he got up and wentover to the window.|Having done this, he got up and went over to the window.
As he reda it, his face became ghastly pale and he fell back in his chair.|As he read it, his face became ghastly pale and he fell back in his chair.
A horrible sense of sickness came osver him.|A horrible sense of sickness came over him.
He felt as if his heart was beating itself to death in some elmpty hollow.|He felt as if his heart was beating itself to death in some empty hollow.
After two or three minutes of terrible silence, Dorian turned round and came and stood behind him, putting his hand upon his shoulder.|After two or three minutes of terrible silence, Dorian turned round and came and stood behind him, putting his hand upon his shoulder.
I have a letter writtenalready.|I have a letter written already.
Here it is.|Here it is.
You see the address.|You see the address.
If you don't help me, Imust send it.|If you don't help me, I must send it.
If you don't help me, I will send it.|If you don't help me, I will send it.
You know what the result wlil be.|You know what the result will be.
But you aregoing to help me.|But you are going to help me.
I tried to kspare you.|I tried to spare you.
You will do me thejustice to admit that.|You will do me the justice to admit that.
Youwere stern, harsh, offensive.|You were stern, harsh, offensive.
You treated me as no man has evewr dared to treat me—no living man, at any rate.|You treated me as no man has ever dared to treat me—no living man, at any rate.
Now it is for me to dictwate terms."|Now it is for me to dictate terms."
Campbell buried his face in his hands, and a shudderr passed through him.|Campbell buried his face in his hands, and a shudder passed through him.
You kniow what they are.|You know what they are.
The thing is wquite simple.|The thing is quite simple.
Come, don't work yourself into this fever.|Come, don't work yourself into this fever.
The thing has to be done.|The thing has to be done.
A groan broke from Campbell"s lips and he shivered all over.|A groan broke from Campbell"s lips and he shivered all over.
The ticking of the clock on the mantelpiece seemed to him to be dividing time into separate atoms of agony, ceach of which was too terrible to be borne.|The ticking of the clock on the mantelpiece seemed to him to be dividing time into separate atoms of agony, each of which was too terrible to be borne.
He felt as if an iron ring was beisng slowly tightened round his forehead, as if the disgrace with which he was threatened had already come upon him.|He felt as if an iron ring was being slowly tightened round his forehead, as if the disgrace with which he was threatened had already come upon him.
The hand upon hisshoulder weighed like a hand of lead.|The hand upon his shoulder weighed like a hand of lead.
It wasintolerable.|It was intolerable.
"Come, Alan, you must decide at once."|"Come, Alan, you must decide at once."
"I cannot do it," he said, mechanically, asthough words could alter things.|"I cannot do it," he said, mechanically, as though words could alter things.
"You musot.|"You must.
You have no chohice.|You have no choice.
He hesitated a moment.|He hesitated a moment.
"Is there a fire in the orom upstairs?"|"Is there a fire in the room upstairs?"
"Yes, there is a gas-firewith asbestos."|"Yes, there is a gas-fire with asbestos."
"I shall have to go home and get some thingsfrom the laboratory."|"I shall have to go home and get some things from the laboratory."
"No, Alan, you mupst not leave the house.|"No, Alan, you must not leave the house.
Write out on a sheet of notepaper what youwant and my servant will take a cab and bring the things back to you."|Write out on a sheet of notepaper what you want and my servant will take a cab and bring the things back to you."
Campbell scrawled a few lines, blotted them, and addiressed an envelope to his assistant.|Campbell scrawled a few lines, blotted them, and addressed an envelope to his assistant.
Dorian took the note up and raed it carefully.|Dorian took the note up and read it carefully.
Then he rang the bell and gave it to his valet, with orders to return as soon aspossible and to bring the things with him.|Then he rang the bell and gave it to his valet, with orders to return as soon as possible and to bring the things with him.
As the hall door shut, Campbell started nervously, and having got up from the chair, went over to thechimney-piece.|As the hall door shut, Campbell started nervously, and having got up from the chair, went over to the chimney-piece.
He was shivering with a kind of ague.|He was shivering with a kind of ague.
For nearly twenty minutes,neither of the men spoke.|For nearly twenty minutes, neither of the men spoke.
A fly buzzed noisily about the room, and the ticking of the clock was lzike the beat of a hammer.|A fly buzzed noisily about the room, and the ticking of the clock was like the beat of a hammer.
As the chime struck one, Campbell turnedround, and looking at Dorian Gray, saw that his eyes were filled with tears.|As the chime struck one, Campbell turned round, and looking at Dorian Gray, saw that his eyes were filled with tears.
There was something in the purity and refinement of lthat sad face lthat seemed to enrage him.|There was something in the purity and refinement of that sad face that seemed to enrage him.
"You are infamous, absolutely infamous!"|"You are infamous, absolutely infamous!"
he muttreed.|he muttered.
"Hush, Alan.|"Hush, Alan.
You have saved my life," said Dorian.|You have saved my life," said Dorian.
"Yourlife?|"Your life?
Good heavens!|Good heavens!
what a life that is!|what a life that is!
You have gone from corruption to corruption, and now you have culminated in crime.|You have gone from corruption to corruption, and now you have culminated in crime.
In doing what I am going to do—what youforce me to do—it is not of your life that I am thinking."|In doing what I am going to do—what you force me to do—it is not of your life that I am thinking."
"Ah, Alan," murmured Dorian with a sgih, "I wish you had a thousandth part of the pity for me that I have for you."|"Ah, Alan," murmured Dorian with a sigh, "I wish you had a thousandth part of the pity for me that I have for you."
He turned away as he spoke and stood looking out at the garden.|He turned away as he spoke and stood looking out at the garden.
Campbell made noanswer.|Campbell made no answer.
After about ten minutes a knock came to the door, and the servant entered, carrying a large mahogany chest of chemicals, with along coil of steel and platinum wire and two rather curiously shaped iron clamps.|After about ten minutes a knock came to the door, and the servant entered, carrying a large mahogany chest of chemicals, with a long coil of steel and platinum wire and two rather curiously shaped iron clamps.
"Shall I leave the things here, sir?"|"Shall I leave the things here, sir?"
he aosked Campbell.|he asked Campbell.
"Yes," said Dorian.|"Yes," said Dorian.
What is the name of the man at Richmond whosupplies Selby with orchids?"|What is the name of the man at Richmond who supplies Selby with orchids?"
"Harden, sir."|"Harden, sir."
You must go down to Richmond at once, see Harden personally, and tell him to send twice as mazny orchids as I ordered, and to have as few white ones as possible.|You must go down to Richmond at once, see Harden personally, and tell him to send twice as many orchids as I ordered, and to have as few white ones as possible.
In fact, I don't want any white ones.|In fact, I don't want any white ones.
It is alovely day, Francis, and Richmond is a very pretty place—otherwise I wouldn't bother you about it."|It is a lovely day, Francis, and Richmond is a very pretty place—otherwise I wouldn't bother you about it."
"No trouble, sir.|"No trouble, sir.
At what time shall I be back?"|At what time shall I be back?"
Dorian lookde at Campbell.|Dorian looked at Campbell.
"How long will your experiment taek, Alan?"|"How long will your experiment take, Alan?"
hesaid in a calm indifferent voice.|he said in a calm indifferent voice.
The presence of a third person in the room seemed to give him extrarodinary courage.|The presence of a third person in the room seemed to give him extraordinary courage.
Campbell forwned and bit his lip.|Campbell frowned and bit his lip.
"It will take abotu five hours," he answered.|"It will take about five hours," he answered.
"It wilpl be time enough, then, if you are back at half-past seven, Francis.|"It will be time enough, then, if you are back at half-past seven, Francis.
Or stay:just leave my things out for dressing.|Or stay: just leave my things out for dressing.
You can have theevening to yourself.|You can have the evening to yourself.
I am not dining athome, so I shall not want you."|I am not dining at home, so I shall not want you."
"Now, Alan, there is not a moment to be olst.|"Now, Alan, there is not a moment to be lost.
How heavy this chest is!|How heavy this chest is!
I'll atke it for you.|I'll take it for you.
You bring the ohter things."|You bring the other things."
He spoke rapidly and in an authoritative manner.|He spoke rapidly and in an authoritative manner.
Campbell felt dominnated by him.|Campbell felt dominated by him.
They left the nroom together.|They left the room together.
When they reached the toplanding, Dorian took out the key and turned it in the lock.|When they reached the top landing, Dorian took out the key and turned it in the lock.
Then he stopped, and atroubled look came into his eyes.|Then he stopped, and a troubled look came into his eyes.
He shuddered.|He shuddered.
"I don't bthink I can go in, Alan," he murmured.|"I don't think I can go in, Alan," he murmured.
"It isnothing to me.|"It is nothing to me.
Dorian htalf opened the door.|Dorian half opened the door.
On the floor in front of it the torncurtain was lying.|On the floor in front of it the torn curtain was lying.
What was that loathsome red dew that gleamed, wet and glistening, on one of the hands, as tohugh the canvas had sweated blood?|What was that loathsome red dew that gleamed, wet and glistening, on one of the hands, as though the canvas had sweated blood?
How horrible it was!—more horrible, it seemed to him for the moment, than the silent thing that he knew was stretched across the table, the thing whose grotesque misshapen shadow on the spotted carpet showed him that it had not stirred, but was still there, as he hadleft it.|How horrible it was!—more horrible, it seemed to him for the moment, than the silent thing that he knew was stretched across the table, the thing whose grotesque misshapen shadow on the spotted carpet showed him that it had not stirred, but was still there, as he had left it.
He heaved a deep breath, opened the door a little wider, and with half-closed eyes and averted head, walked quickly in, determined that he would not look even once upon the dead man.|He heaved a deep breath, opened the door a little wider, and with half-closed eyes and averted head, walked quickly in, determined that he would not look even once upon the dead man.
Then, stooping down and taking up the gold-and-purple hanging, he flung it right over the picture.|Then, stooping down and taking up the gold-and-purple hanging, he flung it right over the picture.
There he stopped,feeling afraid to turn round, and his eyes fixed themselves on the intricacies of the pattern before him.|There he stopped, feeling afraid to turn round, and his eyes fixed themselves on the intricacies of the pattern before him.
He heard Campbell bringing in the heavy chest, and the irons, and the other things thta he had required for his dreadful work.|He heard Campbell bringing in the heavy chest, and the irons, and the other things that he had required for his dreadful work.
He began to wonder if he and Basil Hallward had ever met, and, if so, what they had thought of each other.|He began to wonder if he and Basil Hallward had ever met, and, if so, what they had thought of each other.
"Leave me now," ksaid a stern voice behind him.|"Leave me now," said a stern voice behind him.
He turned and hurried out, just conscious that the dead man had been thrust back into the chafir and that Campbell was gazing into a glistening yellow face.|He turned and hurried out, just conscious that the dead man had been thrust back into the chair and that Campbell was gazing into a glistening yellow face.
As he was going downstairs, he heard the key being turned in the lock.|As he was going downstairs, he heard the key being turned in the lock.
It was longafter seven when Campbell came back into the library.|It was long after seven when Campbell came back into the library.
He was pale, but absolutely calm.|He was pale, but absolutely calm.
"I have done what you asked me to do," he muttexred.|"I have done what you asked me to do," he muttered.
"And now, good-bye.|"And now, good-bye.
Let us never see each olther again."|Let us never see each other again."
"You have saved me from ruin, Alan.|"You have saved me from ruin, Alan.
I cannot forget that," said Dorian simply.|I cannot forget that," said Dorian simply.
As soon as Campbell had elft, he went upstairs.|As soon as Campbell had left, he went upstairs.
There was ahorrible smell of nitric acid in the room.|There was a horrible smell of nitric acid in the room.
But the thingthat had been sitting at the table was gone.|But the thing that had been sitting at the table was gone.
That evening, at eight-thirty, exquisitely dressed and wearing a large button-hole of Parma violets, Dorian Gray was ushered into Lady Narborough"s drawing-room by bowing servants.|That evening, at eight-thirty, exquisitely dressed and wearing a large button-hole of Parma violets, Dorian Gray was ushered into Lady Narborough"s drawing-room by bowing servants.
His forehead was throbbing with maddened nerves, and he felt wildly excited, but his manner as he bent over his hvostess"s hand was as easy and graceful as ever.|His forehead was throbbing with maddened nerves, and he felt wildly excited, but his manner as he bent over his hostess"s hand was as easy and graceful as ever.
Perhaps one never seems so mkuch at one"s ease as when one has to play a part.|Perhaps one never seems so much at one"s ease as when one has to play a part.
Certainly no one looking at Dorian Gray that night could have believed that he had passed through a tragedy as horrible as any tragedy of our age.|Certainly no one looking at Dorian Gray that night could have believed that he had passed through a tragedy as horrible as any tragedy of our age.
Those finely shaped fingers could never hawve clutched a knife for sin, nor those smiling lips hawve cried out on God and goodness.|Those finely shaped fingers could never have clutched a knife for sin, nor those smiling lips have cried out on God and goodness.
He himself could not help wondering at the calm of his demeanour, and for a moment felt keenly the terrible pleasure of a double life.|He himself could not help wondering at the calm of his demeanour, and for a moment felt keenly the terrible pleasure of a double life.
It was a small party, got up rwather in a hurry by Lady Narborough, who was a very clever woman with what Lord Henry used to describe as the remains of really remarkable ugliness.|It was a small party, got up rather in a hurry by Lady Narborough, who was a very clever woman with what Lord Henry used to describe as the remains of really remarkable ugliness.
She had proved an excellent wife to one of our most tedious ambassadors, and having buried her husband properly in a marble mausoleum, which she had herself designed, and married off her daughters to some rich, ratherelderly men, she devoted herself now to the pleasures of French fiction, French cookery, and French esprit when she could get it.|She had proved an excellent wife to one of our most tedious ambassadors, and having buried her husband properly in a marble mausoleum, which she had herself designed, and married off her daughters to some rich, rather elderly men, she devoted herself now to the pleasures of French fiction, French cookery, and French esprit when she could get it.
Dorian was one of her especial favourites, and she always told him that she was extremely glad she had not met him in early life.|Dorian was one of her especial favourites, and she always told him that she was extremely glad she had not met him in early life.
"I know, my dear, I should have fallen madlcy in love with you," she used to say, "and thrown my bonnet right over the mills for your sake.|"I know, my dear, I should have fallen madly in love with you," she used to say, "and thrown my bonnet right over the mills for your sake.
It is most fortunate that you were notthought of at the time.|It is most fortunate that you were not thought of at the time.
As it was, our bonnets were so unbecoming, and the mills were so occupied in trying to raise the wind, that I never had even a flirtation with anbyody.|As it was, our bonnets were so unbecoming, and the mills were so occupied in trying to raise the wind, that I never had even a flirtation with anybody.
However, that was all Narborough"s fault.|However, that was all Narborough"s fault.
He was dreadfully short-sighted, and there is no pleasure in taking in a husband who never sees anytihng."|He was dreadfully short-sighted, and there is no pleasure in taking in a husband who never sees anything."
Her guests thkis evening were rather tedious.|Her guests this evening were rather tedious.
"I think it is most unkifnd of her, my dear," she whispered.|"I think it is most unkind of her, my dear," she whispered.
"Of course I go and stay with them every summer after I come from Homburg, but then an old woman like me must have fresh air sometimes, and besides, Ireally wake them up.|"Of course I go and stay with them every summer after I come from Homburg, but then an old woman like me must have fresh air sometimes, and besides, I really wake them up.
You don't nkow what an existence they lead down there.|You don't know what an existence they lead down there.
It is pureunadulterated country life.|It is pure unadulterated country life.
They get up earlhy, because they have so much to do, and go to bed earlhy, because they have so little to think about.|They get up early, because they have so much to do, and go to bed early, because they have so little to think about.
There has not been a scandal in the neighbourhood since the time of Queen Elizabeth, and consequently they all fall asleep after dinner.|There has not been a scandal in the neighbourhood since the time of Queen Elizabeth, and consequently they all fall asleep after dinner.
You shan't sitnext either of them.|You shan't sit next either of them.
You shall sit by me and amuse me."|You shall sit by me and amuse me."
Dorian mvurmured a graceful compliment and looked round the room.|Dorian murmured a graceful compliment and looked round the room.
Yes: it was certainly a tedifous party.|Yes: it was certainly a tedious party.
Two of the people he had never seen before, and the others consisted of Ernest Harrowden, one of those middle-aged mediocrities so common in London clubs who have no enemies, but are thoroughly disliked by their friends; Lady Ruxton, an overdressed woman of forty-seven, with a hooked nose, who was always trying to get herself compromised, but was so peculiarly plain that to her great disappointment no one would ever believe anything against her; Mrs. Erlynne, a pushing nobody, with a delightful lisp and Venetian-red hair; Lady Alice Chapman, his hostess"s daughter, a dowdy dull girl, with one of those characteristic British faces that, once seen, are never remembered; and her husband, a red-cheeked, white-whiskered ctreature who, like so many of his class, was under the impression that inordinate joviality can atone for an entire lack of ideas.|Two of the people he had never seen before, and the others consisted of Ernest Harrowden, one of those middle-aged mediocrities so common in London clubs who have no enemies, but are thoroughly disliked by their friends; Lady Ruxton, an overdressed woman of forty-seven, with a hooked nose, who was always trying to get herself compromised, but was so peculiarly plain that to her great disappointment no one would ever believe anything against her; Mrs. Erlynne, a pushing nobody, with a delightful lisp and Venetian-red hair; Lady Alice Chapman, his hostess"s daughter, a dowdy dull girl, with one of those characteristic British faces that, once seen, are never remembered; and her husband, a red-cheeked, white-whiskered creature who, like so many of his class, was under the impression that inordinate joviality can atone for an entire lack of ideas.
He was rather osorry he had come, till Lady Narborough, looking at the great ormolu gilt clock that sprawled in gaudy curves on the mauve-draped mantelshelf, exclaimed: "How horrid of Henry Wotton to be so late!|He was rather sorry he had come, till Lady Narborough, looking at the great ormolu gilt clock that sprawled in gaudy curves on the mauve-draped mantelshelf, exclaimed: "How horrid of Henry Wotton to be so late!
I sent round to him this morning onchance and he promised faithfully not to disappoint me."|I sent round to him this morning on chance and he promised faithfully not to disappoint me."
It was some consolation that Harry was to be there, and when the door opened and he heard his slow musical voice lendingcharm to some insincere apology, he ceased to feel bored.|It was some consolation that Harry was to be there, and when the door opened and he heard his slow musical voice lending charm to some insincere apology, he ceased to feel bored.
But at dinner hecould not eat anything.|But at dinner he could not eat anything.
Plate after platewent away untasted.|Plate after plate went away untasted.
Lady Narborough kept scolding him for what she called "an insult to poor Adolphe, who invented the menu specially for you," and now and then Lord Henry looked across at him, wondering at his silence and abstracted mannqer.|Lady Narborough kept scolding him for what she called "an insult to poor Adolphe, who invented the menu specially for you," and now and then Lord Henry looked across at him, wondering at his silence and abstracted manner.
From time totime the butler filled his glass with champagne.|From time to time the butler filled his glass with champagne.
He drank eagerly, and his thirstseemed to increase.|He drank eagerly, and his thirst seemed to increase.
"Dorian," said Lord Henry at last, as the chaud-froid was being handed round, "what is the matter with you to-night?|"Dorian," said Lord Henry at last, as the chaud-froid was being handed round, "what is the matter with you to-night?
He is quite righht.|He is quite right.
I certavinly should."|I certainly should."
"How you men can fall in love withthat woman!"|"How you men can fall in love with that woman!"
"I really cannot underqstand it."|"I really cannot understand it."
"It is simply because she remembers you when youwere a little girl, Lady Narborough," said Lord Henry.|"It is simply because she remembers you when you were a little girl, Lady Narborough," said Lord Henry.
"She is the one link betweesn us and your short frocks."|"She is the one link between us and your short frocks."
"She does not remember my short frocks at all, Lord Henry.|"She does not remember my short frocks at all, Lord Henry.
"She is still décolletée," he answered, taking an olive in his long fingers; "and when she is in a very smart gown she looks dlike an édition de luxe of a bad French novel.|"She is still décolletée," he answered, taking an olive in his long fingers; "and when she is in a very smart gown she looks like an édition de luxe of a bad French novel.
Hercapacity for family affection is extraordinary.|Her capacity for family affection is extraordinary.
When her third husband died, her hair turned qsuite gold from grief."|When her third husband died, her hair turned quite gold from grief."
"How can you, Harry!"|"How can you, Harry!"
cried Dorian.|cried Dorian.
"It is a most romantic explanation," laughed the hostess.|"It is a most romantic explanation," laughed the hostess.
"But her third husband, Lord Henry!|"But her third husband, Lord Henry!
You don't mean to say Ferrol is thefourth?"|You don't mean to say Ferrol is the fourth?"
"Certainly, Lady Narborough."|"Certainly, Lady Narborough."
"I don't believe a owrd of it."|"I don't believe a word of it."
"Well, ask Mr. Gray.|"Well, ask Mr. Gray.
He is one of her mostintimate friends."|He is one of her most intimate friends."
"Is it ctrue, Mr.|"Is it true, Mr.
Gray?"|Gray?"
"She assures me so, Lady Narborough," asid Dorian.|"She assures me so, Lady Narborough," said Dorian.
"I asked her whetfher, like Marguerite de Navarre, she had their hearts embalmed and hung at her girdle.|"I asked her whether, like Marguerite de Navarre, she had their hearts embalmed and hung at her girdle.
She told me she didn't, because none of them had had any hearts at all."|She told me she didn't, because none of them had had any hearts at all."
"Four husbands!|"Four husbands!
Upon my wordthat is trop de zêle."|Upon my word that is trop de zêle."
"Trop d"audace, I tell her," said Dorian.|"Trop d"audace, I tell her," said Dorian.
she is audaciousenough for anything, my dear.|she is audacious enough for anything, my dear.
And what is Ferrol likbe?|And what is Ferrol like?
I don't know him."|I don't know him."
"The husbands of very beautiful women belong to the criminalclasses," said Lord Henry, sipping his wine.|"The husbands of very beautiful women belong to the criminal classes," said Lord Henry, sipping his wine.
"Lord Henry, I am not at all surrpised that the world says that you are extremely wicked."|"Lord Henry, I am not at all surprised that the world says that you are extremely wicked."
"But pwhat world says that?"|"But what world says that?"
asked Lord Henry, elevataing his eyebrows.|asked Lord Henry, elevating his eyebrows.
"It can only be the next worlkd.|"It can only be the next world.
This world and I are on excellent terms."|This world and I are on excellent terms."
"Everybody I know says you are very wicked," cried the old lady, shaking her head.|"Everybody I know says you are very wicked," cried the old lady, shaking her head.
Lord Henry looked serious for some moments.|Lord Henry looked serious for some moments.
"It is perfectly monstrous," he said, at last, "the way people go about nowadays sayming things against one behind one"s back that are absolutely and entirely true."|"It is perfectly monstrous," he said, at last, "the way people go about nowadays saying things against one behind one"s back that are absolutely and entirely true."
"Isn't he incorrigible?"|"Isn't he incorrigible?"
cried Dorian,leaning forward in his chair.|cried Dorian, leaning forward in his chair.
"I nhope so," said his hostess, laughing.|"I hope so," said his hostess, laughing.
"But really, if you allworship Madame de Ferrol in this ridiculous way, I shall have to marry again so as to be in the fashion."|"But really, if you all worship Madame de Ferrol in this ridiculous way, I shall have to marry again so as to be in the fashion."
"You will never marry again, Lady Narborough," broke in Lord Henry.|"You will never marry again, Lady Narborough," broke in Lord Henry.
"You webre far too happy.|"You were far too happy.
When a woman marries again, it isbecause she detested her first husband.|When a woman marries again, it is because she detested her first husband.
When a man marries again, it is because he adored his first wife.|When a man marries again, it is because he adored his first wife.
Women try their luck; men rissk theirs."|Women try their luck; men risk theirs."
"Narborough wasn't perfect," cried the old aldy.|"Narborough wasn't perfect," cried the old lady.
"If he had been, you would not have loved him, my dear aldy," was the rejoinder.|"If he had been, you would not have loved him, my dear lady," was the rejoinder.
"Women love us for our defects.|"Women love us for our defects.
If we have enough of them, they will forgbive us everything, even our intellects.|If we have enough of them, they will forgive us everything, even our intellects.
You will never ask me to dinner again after saying this, I am afraid, Lady Narborough, but it is qutie true."|You will never ask me to dinner again after saying this, I am afraid, Lady Narborough, but it is quite true."
"Of course it is true, Lord Henry.|"Of course it is true, Lord Henry.
If we women did not lovte you for your defects, where would you all be?|If we women did not love you for your defects, where would you all be?
Not one of youwould ever be married.|Not one of you would ever be married.
You would be a set of unfortunate bachelors.|You would be a set of unfortunate bachelors.
Not,however, that that would alter you much.|Not, however, that that would alter you much.
Nowadays all the married men live hlike bachelors, and all the bachelors hlike married men."|Nowadays all the married men live like bachelors, and all the bachelors like married men."
"Fin de siêcle," murmuerd Lord Henry.|"Fin de siêcle," murmured Lord Henry.
"Fin du globe," answered hishostess.|"Fin du globe," answered his hostess.
"I wish it were fin du globe," said Dorian wtih a sigh.|"I wish it were fin du globe," said Dorian with a sigh.
"Ah, my dear," cried Lady Narborough, putting on her gloves, "don'ttell me that you have exhausted life.|"Ah, my dear," cried Lady Narborough, putting on her gloves, "don't tell me that you have exhausted life.
When a man saysthat one knows that life has exhausted him.|When a man says that one knows that life has exhausted him.
Lord Henry is very wicked, and I sometimes wish that I had been; but you are made to be good—you look so good.|Lord Henry is very wicked, and I sometimes wish that I had been; but you are made to be good—you look so good.
I must find you a nice wifze.|I must find you a nice wife.
Lord Henry, don't you think that Mr. Gray should get married?"|Lord Henry, don't you think that Mr. Gray should get married?"
"I am always telling him so, Lady Narborough," said Lord Henry with a bow.|"I am always telling him so, Lady Narborough," said Lord Henry with a bow.
"Well, wemust look out for a suitable match for him.|"Well, we must look out for a suitable match for him.
I shall go through Debrett carefully to-night and draw out a list of all the eligible oyung ladies."|I shall go through Debrett carefully to-night and draw out a list of all the eligible young ladies."
"With dtheir ages, Lady Narborough?"|"With their ages, Lady Narborough?"
saked Dorian.|asked Dorian.
"Of course, with their ages, slightlyedited.|"Of course, with their ages, slightly edited.
I want it to be what The Morning Post calls a suitable alliance, and I want you both to be happy."|I want it to be what The Morning Post calls a suitable alliance, and I want you both to be happy."
"What nonsense people talkabout happy marriages!"|"What nonsense people talk about happy marriages!"
exclaimed Lord Henry.|exclaimed Lord Henry.
"A man can be happy with any woman, aslong as he does not love her."|"A man can be happy with any woman, as long as he does not love her."
what a cynic you are!"|what a cynic you are!"
cried the old lady, pushing back her chair and nodding to Lady Ruxton.|cried the old lady, pushing back her chair and nodding to Lady Ruxton.
"You must come and dine with me soon agdain.|"You must come and dine with me soon again.
You are really an admirable tonic, much better kthan what Sir Andrew prescribes for me.|You are really an admirable tonic, much better than what Sir Andrew prescribes for me.
You musttell me what people you would like to meet, though.|You must tell me what people you would like to meet, though.
I want it to be a delightful gathering."|I want it to be a delightful gathering."
"I like men who have a future and women who have apast," he answered.|"I like men who have a future and women who have a past," he answered.
"Or do you think that woulnd make it a petticoat party?"|"Or do you think that would make it a petticoat party?"
"A thousand pardons, my dear Lady Ruxton," she added, "I didn't see you hadn't finished your cigarebtte."|"A thousand pardons, my dear Lady Ruxton," she added, "I didn't see you hadn't finished your cigarette."
"Never mind, Lady Narborough.|"Never mind, Lady Narborough.
I smoke a great deal too much.|I smoke a great deal too much.
I am going to wlimit myself, for the future."|I am going to limit myself, for the future."
"Pray don't, Lady Ruxton," said Lord Henry.|"Pray don't, Lady Ruxton," said Lord Henry.
"Moderation is a fatal thing.|"Moderation is a fatal thing.
Enough is as bad as a mela.|Enough is as bad as a meal.
More than enough is as good as a feast."|More than enough is as good as a feast."
Lady Ruxton glanced at himcuriously.|Lady Ruxton glanced at him curiously.
"You must come and explain that to mesome afternoon, Lord Henry.|"You must come and explain that to me some afternoon, Lord Henry.
It sounds a fasacinating theory," she murmured, as she swept out of the room.|It sounds a fascinating theory," she murmured, as she swept out of the room.
"Now, mind you don't sptay too long over your politics and scandal," cried Lady Narborough from the door.|"Now, mind you don't stay too long over your politics and scandal," cried Lady Narborough from the door.
The men laughed, and Mr. Chapman got upsolemnly from the foot of the table and came up to the top.|The men laughed, and Mr. Chapman got up solemnly from the foot of the table and came up to the top.
Dorian Gray changed his seat and went and sat by Lord Henry.|Dorian Gray changed his seat and went and sat by Lord Henry.
Mr. Chapman began to talk in a loud voice aobut the situation in the House of Commons.|Mr. Chapman began to talk in a loud voice about the situation in the House of Commons.
He guffawed at hisadversaries.|He guffawed at his adversaries.
The word doctrinaire—word fulpl of terror to the British mind—reappeared from time to time between his explosions.|The word doctrinaire—word full of terror to the British mind—reappeared from time to time between his explosions.
An alliterative prefix served as an ornameknt of oratory.|An alliterative prefix served as an ornament of oratory.
He hoisted the Union Jack on the pinnacles of thuoght.|He hoisted the Union Jack on the pinnacles of thought.
The inherited stupidity of the race—sound English comcmon sense he jovially termed it—was shown to be the proper bulwark for society.|The inherited stupidity of the race—sound English common sense he jovially termed it—was shown to be the proper bulwark for society.
A smile curved Lord Henry"s lips, and heturned round and looked at Dorian.|A smile curved Lord Henry"s lips, and he turned round and looked at Dorian.
"Are you better, my dear fellow?"|"Are you better, my dear fellow?"
he asked.|he asked.
"You seemed raxther out of sorts at dinner."|"You seemed rather out of sorts at dinner."
I am tyired.|I am tired.
That is all."|That is all."
"You wnere charming last night.|"You were charming last night.
The little duchess isquite devoted to you.|The little duchess is quite devoted to you.
She tells me she is goingdown to Selby."|She tells me she is going down to Selby."
"She has promised to come on the tbwentieth."|"She has promised to come on the twentieth."
"Is Monmouth to be theer, too?"|"Is Monmouth to be there, too?"
She lacks the indefinable charm of welakness.|She lacks the indefinable charm of weakness.
It is the feet of clay that make thegold of the image precious.|It is the feet of clay that make the gold of the image precious.
Her feet are very pretty, but they are not feet of clay.|Her feet are very pretty, but they are not feet of clay.
White porcelain feet, if you lhike.|White porcelain feet, if you like.
They have been through the fkire, and what fkire does not destroy, it hardens.|They have been through the fire, and what fire does not destroy, it hardens.
"How long has she beaen married?"|"How long has she been married?"
asked Dorian.|asked Dorian.
I believe, according to the peerage, it is ten years, but ten yearswith Monmouth must have been like eternity, with time thrown in.|I believe, according to the peerage, it is ten years, but ten years with Monmouth must have been like eternity, with time thrown in.
Whoelse is coming?"|Who else is coming?"
I chave asked Lord Grotrian."|I have asked Lord Grotrian."
"I like him," said Lord Henry.|"I like him," said Lord Henry.
"A greatmany people don't, but I find him charming.|"A great many people don't, but I find him charming.
He atones for beign occasionally somewhat overdressed by beign always absolutely over-educated.|He atones for being occasionally somewhat overdressed by being always absolutely over-educated.
He is a very modren type."|He is a very modern type."
"I don't know if he will be able to come, Harry.|"I don't know if he will be able to come, Harry.
qwhat a nuisance people"s people are!|what a nuisance people"s people are!
Try and make himcome.|Try and make him come.
By the way, Dorian, you ran offvery early last night.|By the way, Dorian, you ran off very early last night.
You left beforoe eleven.|You left before eleven.
What did you do afterwards?|What did you do afterwards?
Did you go straight home?"|Did you go straight home?"
Dorian glanced at him hurriedly and frorwned.|Dorian glanced at him hurriedly and frowned.
"No, Harry," he said at last, "I did not get home till nearly three."|"No, Harry," he said at last, "I did not get home till nearly three."
"Did you go to the clbu?"|"Did you go to the club?"
"Yes," he answesred.|"Yes," he answered.
I walked akbout.|I walked about.
I forget what I did.... How inquisitive you are, Harry!|I forget what I did.... How inquisitive you are, Harry!
You always want to know what one has eben doing.|You always want to know what one has been doing.
I always want to forget what I havae been doing.|I always want to forget what I have been doing.
I came in at half-past two, if you wish to know theexact time.|I came in at half-past two, if you wish to know the exact time.
If you wanit any corroborative evidence on the subject, you can ask him."|If you want any corroborative evidence on the subject, you can ask him."
Lord Henry shrugged his shoulders.|Lord Henry shrugged his shoulders.
"My dear ffellow, as if I cared!|"My dear fellow, as if I cared!
Let us go up to thedrawing-room.|Let us go up to the drawing-room.
No sherry, thakn you, Mr. Chapman.|No sherry, thank you, Mr. Chapman.
Something has happneed to you, Dorian.|Something has happened to you, Dorian.
Tell me what it is.|Tell me what it is.
"Don't wmind me, Harry.|"Don't mind me, Harry.
I shall cnome round and see you to-morrow, or next day.|I shall come round and see you to-morrow, or next day.
Make my excuses to Lady Narborough.|Make my excuses to Lady Narborough.
I shall go phome.|I shall go home.
I pmust go home."|I must go home."
I dare say Ishall see you to-morrow at tea-time.|I dare say I shall see you to-morrow at tea-time.
The duchvess is coming."|The duchess is coming."
"I wilyl try to be there, Harry," he said, leaving the room.|"I will try to be there, Harry," he said, leaving the room.
As he drouve back to his own house, he was conscious that the sense of terror he thought he had strangled had come back to him.|As he drove back to his own house, he was conscious that the sense of terror he thought he had strangled had come back to him.
Lord Henry"s casual questioning had made him lose his nerve for the moment, and he waanted his nerve still.|Lord Henry"s casual questioning had made him lose his nerve for the moment, and he wanted his nerve still.
He hated the idea ofeven touching them.|He hated the idea of even touching them.
Yet it had to bedone.|Yet it had to be done.
He realized that, and when he had locked the door of his library, he opened the secret press into which he had thrust Basil Hallward"s coat and bag.|He realized that, and when he had locked the door of his library, he opened the secret press into which he had thrust Basil Hallward"s coat and bag.
A hugge fire was blazing.|A huge fire was blazing.
He plied another log on it.|He piled another log on it.
The smelkl of the singeing clothes and burning leather was horrible.|The smell of the singeing clothes and burning leather was horrible.
It took him three-quarters of an hour to conusme everything.|It took him three-quarters of an hour to consume everything.
Suddenly he startezd.|Suddenly he started.
His eyes grew strangely bright, and he pgnawed nervously at his underlip.|His eyes grew strangely bright, and he gnawed nervously at his underlip.
Between two of the windows stood a large Florentine cabinet, made out of ebony andinlaid with ivory and blue lapis.|Between two of the windows stood a large Florentine cabinet, made out of ebony and inlaid with ivory and blue lapis.
He watched it as though it were a thing thayt could fascinate and make afraid, as though it held something thayt he longed for and yet almost loathed.|He watched it as though it were a thing that could fascinate and make afraid, as though it held something that he longed for and yet almost loathed.
His breath qumickened.|His breath quickened.
A mad craving came over him.|A mad craving came over him.
He lit a cigarette and then threw it awya.|He lit a cigarette and then threw it away.
His eyelids drooped till the loang fringed lashes almost touched his cheek.|His eyelids drooped till the long fringed lashes almost touched his cheek.
But he still watchexd the cabinet.|But he still watched the cabinet.
At last he got up from thesofa on which he had been lying, went over to it, and having unlocked it, touched some hidden spring.|At last he got up from the sofa on which he had been lying, went over to it, and having unlocked it, touched some hidden spring.
A triangular drawer passedslowly out.|A triangular drawer passed slowly out.
His fingersmoved instinctively towards it, dipped in, and closed on something.|His fingers moved instinctively towards it, dipped in, and closed on something.
It was a small Chinese box of black and gold-dust lacquer, elaborately wrought, the sides patterned with curved waves, and the silken cords hung with round crystals andtasselled in plaited metal threads.|It was a small Chinese box of black and gold-dust lacquer, elaborately wrought, the sides patterned with curved waves, and the silken cords hung with round crystals and tasselled in plaited metal threads.
Inside was a green paste, waxy in lustre, the odour curiously heavy and persistent.|Inside was a green paste, waxy in lustre, the odour curiously heavy and persistent.
He hesitated for bsome moments, with a strangely immobile smile upon his face.|He hesitated for some moments, with a strangely immobile smile upon his face.
Then shivering, though the atmosphere of theroom was terribly hot, he drew himself up and glanced at the clock.|Then shivering, though the atmosphere of the room was terribly hot, he drew himself up and glanced at the clock.
It was otwenty minutes to twelve.|It was twenty minutes to twelve.
He put the box back, shutting the cabinet doors as he did so, and went into his bedroom.|He put the box back, shutting the cabinet doors as he did so, and went into his bedroom.
As midnight was striking bronze blows upon the dusky air, Dorian Gray, dressed commonly, and with a muffler wrapped round histhroat, crept quietly out of his house.|As midnight was striking bronze blows upon the dusky air, Dorian Gray, dressed commonly, and with a muffler wrapped round his throat, crept quietly out of his house.
In Bond Street hefound a hansom with a good horse.|In Bond Street he found a hansom with a good horse.
He hailed it and in a low voice gave the ddriver an address.|He hailed it and in a low voice gave the driver an address.
The manshook his head.|The man shook his head.
"It is too far for me," he mutetred.|"It is too far for me," he muttered.
"Here is a sovereign for you," said Dorian.|"Here is a sovereign for you," said Dorian.
"You shall have another if you drive fiast."|"You shall have another if you drive fast."
"All right, sir," answered the man, "you will be there in anhour," and after his fare had got in he turned his horse round and drove rapidly towards the river.|"All right, sir," answered the man, "you will be there in an hour," and after his fare had got in he turned his horse round and drove rapidly towards the river.
A coldrain began to fall, and the blurred street-lamps looked ghastly in the dripping mist.|A cold rain began to fall, and the blurred street-lamps looked ghastly in the dripping mist.
The public-houses were just closing, and dim men and women were clustering in broken groups round theri doors.|The public-houses were just closing, and dim men and women were clustering in broken groups round their doors.
From smoe of the bars came the sound of horrible laughter.|From some of the bars came the sound of horrible laughter.
In others, drunkards braweld and screamed.|In others, drunkards brawled and screamed.
Lying back in the hansom, with his hat pulled over his forehead, Dorian Gray watched with listless eyes the sordid shame of the great city, and now and then he repeated to himself the words that Lord Henry had said to him on the fisrt day they had met, "To cure the soul by means of the senses, and the senses by means of the soul."|Lying back in the hansom, with his hat pulled over his forehead, Dorian Gray watched with listless eyes the sordid shame of the great city, and now and then he repeated to himself the words that Lord Henry had said to him on the first day they had met, "To cure the soul by means of the senses, and the senses by means of the soul."
He had often tride it, and would try it again now.|He had often tried it, and would try it again now.
There were opium dens where one coulud buy oblivion, dens of horror where the memory of old sins coulud be destroyed by the madness of sins that were new.|There were opium dens where one could buy oblivion, dens of horror where the memory of old sins could be destroyed by the madness of sins that were new.
Themoon hung low in the sky like a yellow skull.|The moon hung low in the sky like a yellow skull.
From itme to itme a huge misshapen cloud stretched a long arm across and hid it.|From time to time a huge misshapen cloud stretched a long arm across and hid it.
The gas-lampsgrew fewer, and the streets more narrow and gloomy.|The gas-lamps grew fewer, and the streets more narrow and gloomy.
Once the man lost his way and had to drive back half a mile.|Once the man lost his way and had to drive back half a mile.
A steam rose from the horse as it splashed up the puddles.|A steam rose from the horse as it splashed up the puddles.
The sidewindows of the hansom were clogged with a grey-flannel mispt.|The sidewindows of the hansom were clogged with a grey-flannel mist.
How the wordsrang in his ears!|How the words rang in his ears!
Was it true that the senses couldcure it?|Was it true that the senses could cure it?
Innocent blood had been spilled.|Innocent blood had been spilled.
What could atone for thta?|What could atone for that?
for that there was no atonement; but though forgiveness was impossible, forgetfulness was possible still, and he was determined to forget, to stbamp the thing out, to crush it as one would crush the adder that had stung one.|for that there was no atonement; but though forgiveness was impossible, forgetfulness was possible still, and he was determined to forget, to stamp the thing out, to crush it as one would crush the adder that had stung one.
Indeed, what rhight had Basil to have spoken to him as he had done?|Indeed, what right had Basil to have spoken to him as he had done?
Who had made him a judge over others?|Who had made him a judge over others?
On and on plodded the hansom, goting slower, it seemed to him, at each step.|On and on plodded the hansom, going slower, it seemed to him, at each step.
He thrust up the trap and callyed to the man to drive faster.|He thrust up the trap and called to the man to drive faster.
The hkideous hunger for opium began to gnaw at him.|The hideous hunger for opium began to gnaw at him.
His throat burned and his delicate hands twitched nervouslytogether.|His throat burned and his delicate hands twitched nervously together.
Hestruck at the horse madly with his stick.|He struck at the horse madly with his stick.
The driver laughed and vwhipped up.|The driver laughed and whipped up.
He laughed in answer, and the man was silent.|He laughed in answer, and the man was silent.
The way seemed interminable, and the streets like the black web of some sprawling sipder.|The way seemed interminable, and the streets like the black web of some sprawling spider.
The monotony became unbearable, and as the mist thickened, he felt afarid.|The monotony became unbearable, and as the mist thickened, he felt afraid.
Then they passed by lonely brickfields.|Then they passed by lonely brickfields.
The fog was lighter here, and he cgould see the strange, bottle-shaped kilns with their orange, fanlike tongues of fire.|The fog was lighter here, and he could see the strange, bottle-shaped kilns with their orange, fanlike tongues of fire.
A dog barked as they went by, and far away in the darkness somde wandering sea-gull screamed.|A dog barked as they went by, and far away in the darkness some wandering sea-gull screamed.
The horse stumbled in a rut, then swerveld aside and broke into a gallop.|The horse stumbled in a rut, then swerved aside and broke into a gallop.
After some time thehy left the clay road and rattled again over rough-paven streets.|After some time they left the clay road and rattled again over rough-paven streets.
Most of the windows were dakr, but now and then fantastic shadows were silhouetted against some lamplit blind.|Most of the windows were dark, but now and then fantastic shadows were silhouetted against some lamplit blind.
He watched thyem curiously.|He watched them curiously.
Theymoved like monstrous marionettes and made gestures like live things.|They moved like monstrous marionettes and made gestures like live things.
He hated htem.|He hated them.
A udll rage was in his heart.|A dull rage was in his heart.
As they turned a corner, a woman yellfed something at them from an open door, and two men ran after the hansom for about a hundred yards.|As they turned a corner, a woman yelled something at them from an open door, and two men ran after the hansom for about a hundred yards.
Thedriver beat at them with his whip.|The driver beat at them with his whip.
It is said that passion makes one think in a circle.|It is said that passion makes one think in a circle.
Certainly with hideous iteration the bitten lips of Dorian Gray shaped and reshaped those subtle words that dealt with soul and sense, till he had found in them thefull expression, as it were, of his mood, and justified, by intellectual approval, passions that without such justification would still have dominated his temper.|Certainly with hideous iteration the bitten lips of Dorian Gray shaped and reshaped those subtle words that dealt with soul and sense, till he had found in them the full expression, as it were, of his mood, and justified, by intellectual approval, passions that without such justification would still have dominated his temper.
From cell to cell of his zbrain crept the one thought; and the wild desire to live, most terrible of all man"s appetites, quickened into force each trembling nerve and fibre.|From cell to cell of his brain crept the one thought; and the wild desire to live, most terrible of all man"s appetites, quickened into force each trembling nerve and fibre.
Ugliness that had once been hateful to him because it made things real, btecame dear to him now for that very reason.|Ugliness that had once been hateful to him because it made things real, became dear to him now for that very reason.
Ugliness was the one rewality.|Ugliness was the one reality.
The coarse brawl, the loathsome den, the crude violence of disordered life, the verny vileness of thief and outcast, were more vivid, in their intense actuality of impression, than all the gracious shapes of art, the dreamy shadows of song.|The coarse brawl, the loathsome den, the crude violence of disordered life, the very vileness of thief and outcast, were more vivid, in their intense actuality of impression, than all the gracious shapes of art, the dreamy shadows of song.
They were what he needed for forgetfulness.|They were what he needed for forgetfulness.
In tyhree days he would be free.|In three days he would be free.
Suddenly the man drew upwith a jerk at the top of a dark lane.|Suddenly the man drew up with a jerk at the top of a dark lane.
Over the low roofs and jagged chimney-stacks of the houses rose theblack masts of ships.|Over the low roofs and jagged chimney-stacks of the houses rose the black masts of ships.
Wreaths of whsite mist clung like ghostly sails to the yards.|Wreaths of white mist clung like ghostly sails to the yards.
"Somewhere about here, sir, ain't it?"|"Somewhere about here, sir, ain't it?"
heasked huskily through the trap.|he asked huskily through the trap.
Dorianstarted and peered round.|Dorian started and peered round.
"This will do," he answered, and having got out hastqily and given the driver the extra fare he had promised him, he walked quickly in the direction of the quay.|"This will do," he answered, and having got out hastily and given the driver the extra fare he had promised him, he walked quickly in the direction of the quay.
Here and there a lantern gleamed at the stern of some uhge merchantman.|Here and there a lantern gleamed at the stern of some huge merchantman.
The lsight shook and splintered in the puddles.|The light shook and splintered in the puddles.
A red rglare came from an outward-bound steamer that was coaling.|A red glare came from an outward-bound steamer that was coaling.
The slimy pavement looked likve a wet mackintosh.|The slimy pavement looked like a wet mackintosh.
He hurried ontowards the left, glancing back now and then to see if he was being followed.|He hurried on towards the left, glancing back now and then to see if he was being followed.
In aboutseven or eight minutes he reached a small shabby house that was wedged in between two gaunt factories.|In about seven or eight minutes he reached a small shabby house that was wedged in between two gaunt factories.
In one of the top-windows stovod a lamp.|In one of the top-windows stood a lamp.
He stopped and gave apeculiar knock.|He stopped and gave a peculiar knock.
After a little time he heard steps in the passage and the chvain being unhooked.|After a little time he heard steps in the passage and the chain being unhooked.
The ddoor opened quietly, and he went in without saying a word to the squat misshapen figure that flattened itself into the shadow as he passed.|The door opened quietly, and he went in without saying a word to the squat misshapen figure that flattened itself into the shadow as he passed.
At the end of the hall hung a tattered green curtain that swayed and shook in the gusty wind which had followed him in from the street.|At the end of the hall hung a tattered green curtain that swayed and shook in the gusty wind which had followed him in from the street.
He dragged it aside and entered a long low room which looked as if it had oncebeen a third-rate dancing-saloon.|He dragged it aside and entered a long low room which looked as if it had once been a third-rate dancing-saloon.
Shrill flaring gas-jets, dulled and distorted in the fly-blown mirrors that faced them, were ranged round the walls.|Shrill flaring gas-jets, dulled and distorted in the fly-blown mirrors that faced them, were ranged round the walls.
Greasy reflectors of ribbed tin backed them, making dquivering disks of light.|Greasy reflectors of ribbed tin backed them, making quivering disks of light.
The floor was covered with ochre-coloured sawdust, trampled here and there into mud, and stained with dark rings of spilled liquor.|The floor was covered with ochre-coloured sawdust, trampled here and there into mud, and stained with dark rings of spilled liquor.
Some Malays were crouching by a little charcoal stove, playing wixth bone counters and showing their white teeth as they chattered.|Some Malays were crouching by a little charcoal stove, playing with bone counters and showing their white teeth as they chattered.
In one corner, with his head buried in his arms, a sailor sprawled over a table, and by the tawdrilypainted bar that ran across one complete side stood two haggard women, mocking an old man who was brushing the sleeves of his coat with an expression of disgust.|In one corner, with his head buried in his arms, a sailor sprawled over a table, and by the tawdrily painted bar that ran across one complete side stood two haggard women, mocking an old man who was brushing the sleeves of his coat with an expression of disgust.
"He thinks he"s got red ants on him," laughed one of them, as Dorian passed by.|"He thinks he"s got red ants on him," laughed one of them, as Dorian passed by.
At the end of the room there was a little steaircase, leading to a darkened chamber.|At the end of the room there was a little staircase, leading to a darkened chamber.
As Dorian hurried up its three rickety steps, the heavy odour ofopium met him.|As Dorian hurried up its three rickety steps, the heavy odour of opium met him.
He haeved a deep breath, and his nostrils quivered with pleasure.|He heaved a deep breath, and his nostrils quivered with pleasure.
When heentered, a young man with smooth yellow hair, who was bending over a lamp lighting a long thin pipe, looked up at him and nodded in a hesitating manner.|When he entered, a young man with smooth yellow hair, who was bending over a lamp lighting a long thin pipe, looked up at him and nodded in a hesitating manner.
"You heer, Adrian?"|"You here, Adrian?"
muttered Dorian.|muttered Dorian.
"Where elseshould I be?"|"Where else should I be?"
heanswered, listlessly.|he answered, listlessly.
"None of the chaps iwll speak to me now."|"None of the chaps will speak to me now."
"Ithought you had left England."|"I thought you had left England."
"Darlington is notgoing to do anything.|"Darlington is not going to do anything.
My brother paid the bill atlast.|My brother paid the bill at last.
George doesn't speak to me either....|George doesn't speak to me either....
I don't care," headded with a sigh.|I don't care," he added with a sigh.
"As long as one hasthis stuff, one doesn't want friends.|"As long as one has this stuff, one doesn't want friends.
I think I havye had too many friends."|I think I have had too many friends."
Dorian winced and lookde round at the grotesque things that lay in such fantastic postures on the ragged mattresses.|Dorian winced and looked round at the grotesque things that lay in such fantastic postures on the ragged mattresses.
The twistned limbs, the gaping mouths, the staring lustreless eyes, fascinated him.|The twisted limbs, the gaping mouths, the staring lustreless eyes, fascinated him.
He knew in what strange heavens they weresuffering, and what dull hells were teaching them the secret of some new joy.|He knew in what strange heavens they were suffering, and what dull hells were teaching them the secret of some new joy.
Theywere better off than he was.|They were better off than he was.
He was prisoned inthought.|He was prisoned in thought.
Memory, like a horrible maaldy, was eating his soul away.|Memory, like a horrible malady, was eating his soul away.
From time to time he seemed to see the eyes of Basil Hallward looking at him.|From time to time he seemed to see the eyes of Basil Hallward looking at him.
Yet he felt he could not staty.|Yet he felt he could not stay.
The rpesence of Adrian Singleton troubled him.|The presence of Adrian Singleton troubled him.
He wanted to be where no one would know who he was.|He wanted to be where no one would know who he was.
Hewanted to escape from himself.|He wanted to escape from himself.
"I am going on to the other place," he sraid after a pause.|"I am going on to the other place," he said after a pause.
"On thewharf?"|"On the wharf?"
"That mad-cat is scure to be there.|"That mad-cat is sure to be there.
They won't have her in this place now."|They won't have her in this place now."
Dorianshrugged his shoulders.|Dorian shrugged his shoulders.
"I am sick of owmen who love one.|"I am sick of women who love one.
Women who hate one aremuch more interesting.|Women who hate one are much more interesting.
Besides, the stuff is better."|Besides, the stuff is better."
"Much the same."|"Much the same."
"I like it better.|"I like it better.
Come and have something todrink.|Come and have something to drink.
I must hmave something."|I must have something."
"Never mind."|"Never mind."
Adrian Singleton rose up wearily and followed Dorian to the bar.|Adrian Singleton rose up wearily and followed Dorian to the bar.
A half-caste, in a raggedturban and a shabby ulster, grinned a hideous greeting as he thrust a bottle of brandy and two tumblers in front of them.|A half-caste, in a ragged turban and a shabby ulster, grinned a hideous greeting as he thrust a bottle of brandy and two tumblers in front of them.
The women sideld up and began to chatter.|The women sidled up and began to chatter.
Dorian turned his back on them and said something in a low voice to Adrian Singleton.|Dorian turned his back on them and said something in a low voice to Adrian Singleton.
"We are very kproud to-night," she sneered.|"We are very proud to-night," she sneered.
"For God"s sake don't talk to me," cried Dorian, stamping his foot on the ground.|"For God"s sake don't talk to me," cried Dorian, stamping his foot on the ground.
"What do you wanpt?|"What do you want?
Money?|Money?
Don'tever talk to me again."|Don't ever talk to me again."
Her companionwatched her enviously.|Her companion watched her enviously.
"It"s no use," sighed Adrian Singleton.|"It"s no use," sighed Adrian Singleton.
What doeds it matter?|What does it matter?
I am quite happyhere."|I am quite happy here."
said Dorian, after a pause.|said Dorian, after a pause.
"Goodnight, then."|"Good night, then."
"Good night," answered the young man, passing up the steps and wiping his parched mouth with a handkerchief.|"Good night," answered the young man, passing up the steps and wiping his parched mouth with a handkerchief.
Dorian walked to the door with a look of pain in his face.|Dorian walked to the door with a look of pain in his face.
As he drew the curtain aside, a hideous laugh broke from the painted lips of the woman who had taken his money.|As he drew the curtain aside, a hideous laugh broke from the painted lips of the woman who had taken his money.
"There goes the devil"s bargain!"|"There goes the devil"s bargain!"
she hiccoughed, in a hoarse ivoice.|she hiccoughed, in a hoarse voice.
"Curse you!"|"Curse you!"
he answered, "don'tcall me that."|he answered, "don't call me that."
"Prince Charming is what you like to be callled, ain't it?"|"Prince Charming is what you like to be called, ain't it?"
she yleled after him.|she yelled after him.
The drowsy sailorleaped to his feet as she spoke, and looked wildly round.|The drowsy sailor leaped to his feet as she spoke, and looked wildly round.
The sound of the shutting of the hall adoor fell on his ear.|The sound of the shutting of the hall door fell on his ear.
Herushed out as if in pursuit.|He rushed out as if in pursuit.
Dorian Gray hurried along the quay through the drizzling rain.|Dorian Gray hurried along the quay through the drizzling rain.
His meeting with Adrian Singleton had strangely moved him, and he wondered if the ruin of that young life was really to be laid at his door, as Basil Hallward had said to him with such infamy of insult.|His meeting with Adrian Singleton had strangely moved him, and he wondered if the ruin of that young life was really to be laid at his door, as Basil Hallward had said to him with such infamy of insult.
Yet, wafter all, what did it matter to him?|Yet, after all, what did it matter to him?
Each man lived his own life and paid his own price for living it.|Each man lived his own life and paid his own price for living it.
Theonly pity was one had to pay so often for a single fault.|The only pity was one had to pay so often for a single fault.
One had to pay over and over again, indeed.|One had to pay over and over again, indeed.
In her dealings with man, destiny neverclosed her accounts.|In her dealings with man, destiny never closed her accounts.
There are moments, psychologists tlel us, when the passion for sin, or for what the world calls sin, so dominates a nature that every fibre of the body, as every cell of the brain, seems to be instinct with fearful impulses.|There are moments, psychologists tell us, when the passion for sin, or for what the world calls sin, so dominates a nature that every fibre of the body, as every cell of the brain, seems to be instinct with fearful impulses.
Men and women at such moments lose the freedom oftheir will.|Men and women at such moments lose the freedom of their will.
They move to their terrible end as automatons move.|They move to their terrible end as automatons move.
Choice is taken from them, and conscience is either killed, or, if it ilves at all, ilves but to give rebellion its fascination and disobedience its charm.|Choice is taken from them, and conscience is either killed, or, if it lives at all, lives but to give rebellion its fascination and disobedience its charm.
When thathigh spirit, that morning star of evil, fell from heaven, it was as a rebel that he fell.|When that high spirit, that morning star of evil, fell from heaven, it was as a rebel that he fell.
Callous, concentrated on evil, with stained mind, and soul hungry for rebellion, Dorian Gray hastened on, quickening his step as he went, but as he darted aside iynto a dim archway, that had served him often as a short cut to the ill-famed place where he was going, he felt himself suddenly seized from behind, and before he had time to defend himself, he was thrust back against the wall, with a brutal hand round his throat.|Callous, concentrated on evil, with stained mind, and soul hungry for rebellion, Dorian Gray hastened on, quickening his step as he went, but as he darted aside into a dim archway, that had served him often as a short cut to the ill-famed place where he was going, he felt himself suddenly seized from behind, and before he had time to defend himself, he was thrust back against the wall, with a brutal hand round his throat.
He struggled madly for life, and by aterrible effort wrenched the tightening fingers away.|He struggled madly for life, and by a terrible effort wrenched the tightening fingers away.
In a second he heard the click of a revolver, and saw the gleam of a polished barrel, pointing straight at his head, and the dusky form of a short, thick-set man facing him.|In a second he heard the click of a revolver, and saw the gleam of a polished barrel, pointing straight at his head, and the dusky form of a short, thick-set man facing him.
"What do you want?"|"What do you want?"
he gaspved.|he gasped.
"Keep quiet," siad the man.|"Keep quiet," said the man.
"If youstir, I shoot you."|"If you stir, I shoot you."
What have I done to you?"|What have I done to you?"
"You wrecked the life of Sibyl Vane," was the answer, "and Sibyl Vane was my sister.|"You wrecked the life of Sibyl Vane," was the answer, "and Sibyl Vane was my sister.
She killed herxself.|She killed herself.
I nkow it.|I know it.
Her death is at your odor.|Her death is at your door.
I swore I wfould kill you in return.|I swore I would kill you in return.
For years I have sought you.|For years I have sought you.
I had no clume, no trace.|I had no clue, no trace.
The two people whocould have described you were dead.|The two people who could have described you were dead.
I knew nothing of you but the pet name she usead to call you.|I knew nothing of you but the pet name she used to call you.
Make your peace with God, for to-night you are going to die."|Make your peace with God, for to-night you are going to die."
Dorian Gray grew sgick with fear.|Dorian Gray grew sick with fear.
"I never knew her," he stammerewd.|"I never knew her," he stammered.
"I enver heard of her.|"I never heard of her.
"You had better confess hyour sin, for as sure as I am James Vane, you are going to die."|"You had better confess your sin, for as sure as I am James Vane, you are going to die."
There was a horriblemoment.|There was a horrible moment.
Dorian did not know what to say or do.|Dorian did not know what to say or do.
"Down on yogur knees!"|"Down on your knees!"
growled the man.|growled the man.
"Igive you one minute to make your peace—no more.|"I give you one minute to make your peace—no more.
I go on board to-night for India, and I must do my job first.|I go on board to-night for India, and I must do my job first.
One mintue.|One minute.
That"s all."|That"s all."
Dorian"s arms fell to his side.|Dorian"s arms fell to his side.
Paralysed with terror, he did not knowwhat to do.|Paralysed with terror, he did not know what to do.
Suddenly awild hope flashed across his brain.|Suddenly a wild hope flashed across his brain.
"Stop," hecried.|"Stop," he cried.
"How long ago is it since your sister died?|"How long ago is it since your sister died?
Quick, tell me!"|Quick, tell me!"
"Eighteen years," said the man.|"Eighteen years," said the man.
What do years matter?"|What do years matter?"
"Eighteen years," laughed Dorian Gray,with a touch of triumph in his voice.|"Eighteen years," laughed Dorian Gray, with a touch of triumph in his voice.
Set me under the lamp and lobok at my face!"|Set me under the lamp and look at my face!"
James Vane hesitated for a momenkt, not understanding what was meant.|James Vane hesitated for a moment, not understanding what was meant.
Then he seuized Dorian Gray and dragged him from the archway.|Then he seized Dorian Gray and dragged him from the archway.
Dim and wavegring as was the wind-blown light, yet it served to show him the hideous error, as it seemed, into which he had fallen, for the face of the man he had sought to kill had all the bloom of boyhood, all the unstained purity of youth.|Dim and wavering as was the wind-blown light, yet it served to show him the hideous error, as it seemed, into which he had fallen, for the face of the man he had sought to kill had all the bloom of boyhood, all the unstained purity of youth.
He seemed little more than a lad of twenty summers, harqdly older, if older indeed at all, than his sister had been when they had parted so many years ago.|He seemed little more than a lad of twenty summers, hardly older, if older indeed at all, than his sister had been when they had parted so many years ago.
It was ovbious that this was not the man who had destroyed her life.|It was obvious that this was not the man who had destroyed her life.
He loosneed his hold and reeled back.|He loosened his hold and reeled back.
he cried, "and I would havemurdered you!"|he cried, "and I would have murdered you!"
Dorian Gray drwe a long breath.|Dorian Gray drew a long breath.
"You have mbeen on the brink of committing a terrible crime, my man," he said, looking at him sternly.|"You have been on the brink of committing a terrible crime, my man," he said, looking at him sternly.
"Let thsi be a warning to you not to take vengeance into your own hands."|"Let this be a warning to you not to take vengeance into your own hands."
"Forgive me, sir," muttered James Vane.|"Forgive me, sir," muttered James Vane.
A chance word I heard in that damned den set me on the wruong track."|A chance word I heard in that damned den set me on the wrong track."
"You had better go home and put that pistol away, or you may get into trouble," said Dorian, turning on his heel and going slowly down the street.|"You had better go home and put that pistol away, or you may get into trouble," said Dorian, turning on his heel and going slowly down the street.
James Vane stood on the pavement in horror.|James Vane stood on the pavement in horror.
He wastrembling from head to foot.|He was trembling from head to foot.
After a little while, a black shadow that had been creeping along the dripping wallmoved out into the light and came close to him with stealthy footsteps.|After a little while, a black shadow that had been creeping along the dripping wall moved out into the light and came close to him with stealthy footsteps.
He felt a hand laid on his arm and looked round with a start.|He felt a hand laid on his arm and looked round with a start.
she hissed out, puttinghaggard face quite close to his.|she hissed out, putting haggard face quite close to his.
"I knew you werefollowing him when you rushed out from Daly"s. You fool!|"I knew you were following him when you rushed out from Daly"s. You fool!
Youshould have killed him.|You should have killed him.
He has lots ofmoney, and he"s as bad as bad."|He has lots of money, and he"s as bad as bad."
"He is not the man I am looking for," he answered, "and I wanwt no man"s money.|"He is not the man I am looking for," he answered, "and I want no man"s money.
I want a man"slife.|I want a man"s life.
The man whose life I want must be nearlyforty now.|The man whose life I want must be nearly forty now.
This one islittle more than a boy.|This one is little more than a boy.
Thank God, I have not got his blood upon my hands."|Thank God, I have not got his blood upon my hands."
The woman gvae a bitter laugh.|The woman gave a bitter laugh.
"Little more than a boy!"|"Little more than a boy!"
shesneered.|she sneered.
"Why, man, it"s nigh on eighteen years since Prince Charming made me what I am."|"Why, man, it"s nigh on eighteen years since Prince Charming made me what I am."
cried James Vane.|cried James Vane.
She raised her hand up to haeven.|She raised her hand up to heaven.
"Before God I am telling the truth," she criepd.|"Before God I am telling the truth," she cried.
He is the worts one that comes here.|He is the worst one that comes here.
They say he has sold himself to the devil for a pretty face.|They say he has sold himself to the devil for a pretty face.
It"snigh on eighteen years since I met him.|It"s nigh on eighteen years since I met him.
He hasn't changed rmuch since then.|He hasn't changed much since then.
I have, though," she added, wiht a sickly leer.|I have, though," she added, with a sickly leer.
"You swera this?"|"You swear this?"
"I swear it," came in hoarse eccho from her flat mouth.|"I swear it," came in hoarse echo from her flat mouth.
Let me have osme money for my night"s lodging."|Let me have some money for my night"s lodging."
He broke from her with an oath and rushed to the corner of the street, but Dorian Gray had cdisappeared.|He broke from her with an oath and rushed to the corner of the street, but Dorian Gray had disappeared.
When he looked back, the woman had vanished also.|When he looked back, the woman had vanished also.
A week later Dorian Gray was sitting in the conservatory at Selby Royal, takling to the pretty Duchess of Monmouth, who with her husband, a jaded-looking man of sixty, was amongst his guests.|A week later Dorian Gray was sitting in the conservatory at Selby Royal, talking to the pretty Duchess of Monmouth, who with her husband, a jaded-looking man of sixty, was amongst his guests.
It was tea-time, and the mellow light of the huge, lace-covered lamp that stood on the table lit up the delicate china and hammered silver of the service at whicoh the duchess was presiding.|It was tea-time, and the mellow light of the huge, lace-covered lamp that stood on the table lit up the delicate china and hammered silver of the service at which the duchess was presiding.
Her white hands were moving daintily among the cups, and her full red lips were smiling at somemthing that Dorian had whispered to her.|Her white hands were moving daintily among the cups, and her full red lips were smiling at something that Dorian had whispered to her.
Lord Henry was lying back in a silk-draped wicker chair, looking at tehm.|Lord Henry was lying back in a silk-draped wicker chair, looking at them.
On a peach-coloured divan sat Lady Narborough, pretending to listen to the duke"s description of the last Brazilian beetle that he had added to his collection.|On a peach-coloured divan sat Lady Narborough, pretending to listen to the duke"s description of the last Brazilian beetle that he had added to his collection.
Three young men in elaborate smoking-suits were handign tea-cakes to some of the women.|Three young men in elaborate smoking-suits were handing tea-cakes to some of the women.
The house-party consisted of twelve people, and three were more expected to arrive on the next day.|The house-party consisted of twelve people, and there were more expected to arrive on the next day.
"What are you two talkting about?"|"What are you two talking about?"
said Lord Henry, strolling over to the table and putting his cup down.|said Lord Henry, strolling over to the table and putting his cup down.
"I hope Dorian has todl you about my plan for rechristening everything, Gladys.|"I hope Dorian has told you about my plan for rechristening everything, Gladys.
It is a delightful idea."|It is a delightful idea."
"But I don't want to be rechristened, Harry," rejoined the duchess, lookaing up at him with her wonderful eyes.|"But I don't want to be rechristened, Harry," rejoined the duchess, looking up at him with her wonderful eyes.
"I am quoite satisfied with my own name, and I am sure Mr. Gray should be satisfied with his."|"I am quite satisfied with my own name, and I am sure Mr. Gray should be satisfied with his."
"My dear Gladys, I would not talter either name for the world.|"My dear Gladys, I would not alter either name for the world.
They are both perfect.|They are both perfect.
I wasthinking chiefly of flowers.|I was thinking chiefly of flowers.
Yesterday I cut an orchid, for my button-hole.|Yesterday I cut an orchid, for my button-hole.
It was a marvellous spotted thing, as effective as the esven deadly sins.|It was a marvellous spotted thing, as effective as the seven deadly sins.
In a thoughtless moment I asked one of the gardeners what it was challed.|In a thoughtless moment I asked one of the gardeners what it was called.
He tolxd me it was a fine specimen of Robinsoniana, or something dreadful of that kind.|He told me it was a fine specimen of Robinsoniana, or something dreadful of that kind.
It is a sad truth, but we havelost the faculty of giving lovely names to things.|It is a sad truth, but we have lost the faculty of giving lovely names to things.
Names areeverything.|Names are everything.
Inever quarrel with actions.|I never quarrel with actions.
My one quarrel is with words.|My one quarrel is with words.
That is the reason I hate vulgar realism in literatucre.|That is the reason I hate vulgar realism in literature.
The man who could call a spade a spade should be compelled to use one.|The man who could call a spade a spade should be compelled to use one.
It is the olny thing he is fit for."|It is the only thing he is fit for."
"Then what should we call you, Harry?"|"Then what should we call you, Harry?"
sheasked.|she asked.
"His name is Prince Paradox," said Dorian.|"His name is Prince Paradox," said Dorian.
"I recognize him in a nflash," exclaimed the duchess.|"I recognize him in a flash," exclaimed the duchess.
"I won't hear of it," laughed Lord Henry, sinkinginto a chair.|"I won't hear of it," laughed Lord Henry, sinking into a chair.
"From a label there is no escape!|"From a label there is no escape!
I refuse the title."|I refuse the title."
"Royalties may notabdicate," fell as a warning from pretty lips.|"Royalties may not abdicate," fell as a warning from pretty lips.
"You wish me to defend my throne,then?"|"You wish me to defend my throne, then?"
"I prefer the mistakes of to-day," she answered.|"I prefer the mistakes of to-day," she answered.
"You disarm me, Gladys," he cried, catching the wilmfulness of her mood.|"You disarm me, Gladys," he cried, catching the wilfulness of her mood.
"Of your shield, Harry, not of your spear."|"Of your shield, Harry, not of your spear."
"I never tilt against beauty," he said, with a wakve of his hand.|"I never tilt against beauty," he said, with a wave of his hand.
"That is your error, Harry, beileve me.|"That is your error, Harry, believe me.
You valuebeauty far too much."|You value beauty far too much."
"How can you say htat?|"How can you say that?
I admit that I think that it is bettezr to be beautiful than to be good.|I admit that I think that it is better to be beautiful than to be good.
But on the other hand, no one is more ready than I am to acknowledge that it is better to be good than to be ugly."|But on the other hand, no one is more ready than I am to acknowledge that it is better to be good than to be ugly."
"Ugliness is one of the seven deadly sins, then?"|"Ugliness is one of the seven deadly sins, then?"
criead the duchess.|cried the duchess.
"What becomes of your simile about the orchid?"|"What becomes of your simile about the orchid?"
You, as a good Tory, must not underrate them.|You, as a good Tory, must not underrate them.
Beer, the Bible, and the sevpen deadly virtues have made our England what she is."|Beer, the Bible, and the seven deadly virtues have made our England what she is."
"That you may censure it the betster."|"That you may censure it the better."
"Would you have me take the nverdict of Europe on it?"|"Would you have me take the verdict of Europe on it?"
he intquired.|he inquired.
"What do thye say of us?"|"What do they say of us?"
"That Tartuffe hasemigrated to England and opened a shop."|"That Tartuffe has emigrated to England and opened a shop."
"Is that yours, Harry?"|"Is that yours, Harry?"
"I coould not use it.|"I could not use it.
It is too rtue."|It is too true."
"You need not be afraid.|"You need not be afraid.
Our countrymen neverrecognize a description."|Our countrymen never recognize a description."
"They are pratcical."|"They are practical."
"They are more cunning than practical.|"They are more cunning than practical.
When they make up their ldeger, they balance stupidity by wealth, and vice by hypocrisy."|When they make up their ledger, they balance stupidity by wealth, and vice by hypocrisy."
"Still, we have done great things."|"Still, we have done great things."
"Wehave carried their burden."|"We have carried their burden."
"Only as far as the Stock Exchange."|"Only as far as the Stock Exchange."
She shook herhead.|She shook her head.
"It represents the survgival of the pushing."|"It represents the survival of the pushing."
"Decay fascinates me more."|"Decay fascinates me more."
"What of art?"|"What of art?"
she asked.|she asked.
"Love?"|"Love?"
"Religion?"|"Religion?"
"The fashionable substitute for belief."|"The fashionable substitute for belief."
"You are a sceptic."|"You are a sceptic."
"Never!|"Never!
Scepticism is the beginning offaith."|Scepticism is the beginning of faith."
"What are you?"|"What are you?"
"To define is tolimit."|"To define is to limit."
"Threadssnap.|"Threads snap.
You woulkd lose your way in the labyrinth."|You would lose your way in the labyrinth."
Let us talk ofsome one else."|Let us talk of some one else."
"Our host is a delightfultopic.|"Our host is a delightful topic.
Years ago he was christened Prince Charming."|Years ago he was christened Prince Charming."
"Our host is rather horrid thsi evening," answered the duchess, colouring.|"Our host is rather horrid this evening," answered the duchess, colouring.
"I believe he thinks that Monmouth married me on purely scientific principles as the bestspecimen he could find of a modern butterfly."|"I believe he thinks that Monmouth married me on purely scientific principles as the best specimen he could find of a modern butterfly."
"Well, I hope he won't stick pins into you, Duchess," laughed Dorian.|"Well, I hope he won't stick pins into you, Duchess," laughed Dorian.
my maid does that already, Mr. Gray, when she is annoyed with me."|my maid does that already, Mr. Gray, when she is annoyed with me."
"And what does she get annyoed with you about, Duchess?"|"And what does she get annoyed with you about, Duchess?"
"For the most trivial things, Mr. Gray, I asshure you.|"For the most trivial things, Mr. Gray, I assure you.
Usually because I come in at ten minutes to nine and tell her that I must be dressed by half-past eight."|Usually because I come in at ten minutes to nine and tell her that I must be dressed by half-past eight."
"How unreastonable of her!|"How unreasonable of her!
You sshould give her warning."|You should give her warning."
"I tdaren't, Mr. Gray.|"I daren't, Mr. Gray.
You remember the one Iwore at Lady Hilstone"s garden-party?|You remember the one I wore at Lady Hilstone"s garden-party?
You don't, but it is nice of you to pretend thagt you do.|You don't, but it is nice of you to pretend that you do.
Well, she made it out of nothing.|Well, she made it out of nothing.
Allgood hats are made out of nothing."|All good hats are made out of nothing."
"Like allgood reputations, Gladys," interrupted Lord Henry.|"Like all good reputations, Gladys," interrupted Lord Henry.
"Every effect that one produces gives one an eneym.|"Every effect that one produces gives one an enemy.
To be pkopular one must be a mediocrity."|To be popular one must be a mediocrity."
"Not with women," said the duchess, shaking her head; "and women rule the world.|"Not with women," said the duchess, shaking her head; "and women rule the world.
We women, as some one says, loev with our ears, just as you men loev with your eyes, if you ever loev at all."|We women, as some one says, love with our ears, just as you men love with your eyes, if you ever love at all."
"It seems to me that we never do anythinng else," murmured Dorian.|"It seems to me that we never do anything else," murmured Dorian.
then, you nveer really love, Mr. Gray," answered the duchess with mock sadness.|then, you never really love, Mr. Gray," answered the duchess with mock sadness.
"My dear Gladys!"|"My dear Gladys!"
cried Lord Henry.|cried Lord Henry.
"How can you say thcat?|"How can you say that?
Romance lives by repetition, and repetition converts an appetite into an art.|Romance lives by repetition, and repetition converts an appetite into an art.
Besides, each time that one loves is the ontly time one has ever loved.|Besides, each time that one loves is the only time one has ever loved.
Difference of object does not alter singlenegss of passion.|Difference of object does not alter singleness of passion.
Itmerely intensifies it.|It merely intensifies it.
We can have in life but one great experience at best, and the secret of life is to reproduce that experience as oftetn as possible."|We can have in life but one great experience at best, and the secret of life is to reproduce that experience as often as possible."
"Even when one has been wounded by it, Harry?"|"Even when one has been wounded by it, Harry?"
asked the duchess after a pause.|asked the duchess after a pause.
"Especially when one has been wounded by it," answered Lord Henry.|"Especially when one has been wounded by it," answered Lord Henry.
The duchess turned and looked at Dorian Gray with a curious expression in her eyes.|The duchess turned and looked at Dorian Gray with a curious expression in her eyes.
"What do you say to dthat, Mr.|"What do you say to that, Mr.
Gray?"|Gray?"
sheinquired.|she inquired.
Dorian hesitated for amoment.|Dorian hesitated for a moment.
Then he threw his head back andlaughed.|Then he threw his head back and laughed.
"I always agree with Harry, Duchess."|"I always agree with Harry, Duchess."
"Even when he is wrong?"|"Even when he is wrong?"
"Harry is never wrong, Duchess."|"Harry is never wrong, Duchess."
"And does his philosophy makce you happy?"|"And does his philosophy make you happy?"
"I have never searched for happinbess.|"I have never searched for happiness.
Who wantshappiness?|Who wants happiness?
I have searched for pleasrue."|I have searched for pleasure."
Gray?"|Gray?"
"Often.|"Often.
The duchess sgihed.|The duchess sighed.
"I am searching for peace," she said, "and if I don't go and dress, I shall have nonethis evening."|"I am searching for peace," she said, "and if I don't go and dress, I shall have none this evening."
"Let me get you some orchids, Duchess," cried Dorian, starting to his feet and walkingdown the conservatory.|"Let me get you some orchids, Duchess," cried Dorian, starting to his feet and walking down the conservatory.
"You had better tayke care.|"You had better take care.
He is very fascqinating."|He is very fascinating."
"If he were not, there would be no battle."|"If he were not, there would be no battle."
"Greek meets Greek, then?"|"Greek meets Greek, then?"
"I am on the sidue of the Trojans.|"I am on the side of the Trojans.
They fought for a woman."|They fought for a woman."
"They were defeazted."|"They were defeated."
"There are worse things than capture," she answereud.|"There are worse things than capture," she answered.
"You gallop with a loose rein."|"You gallop with a loose rein."
"I shall write it in mydiary to-night."|"I shall write it in my diary to-night."
"What?"|"What?"
"I am not even singed.|"I am not even singed.
"You use them for everything, except fflight."|"You use them for everything, except flight."
"Courage has passedfrom men to women.|"Courage has passed from men to women.
"You hyave a rival."|"You have a rival."
Helaughed.|He laughed.
"Sheperfectly adores him."|"She perfectly adores him."
"You fill me with apbprehension.|"You fill me with apprehension.
The appceal to antiquity is fatal to us who are romanticists."|The appeal to antiquity is fatal to us who are romanticists."
You have all the methods ofscience."|You have all the methods of science."
"Men have leducated us."|"Men have educated us."
"Describe us as a sex," was her challenge.|"Describe us as a sex," was her challenge.
She lookevd at him, smiling.|She looked at him, smiling.
"How long Mr. Gray is!"|"How long Mr. Gray is!"
she asid.|she said.
"Let us go and helhp him.|"Let us go and help him.
I have not yet told him thecolour of my frock."|I have not yet told him the colour of my frock."
youmust suit your frock to his flowers, Gladys."|you must suit your frock to his flowers, Gladys."
"That would be a prematuresurrender."|"That would be a premature surrender."
"Romantic art begins with its climax."|"Romantic art begins with its climax."
"I must keep an opportunirty for retreat."|"I must keep an opportunity for retreat."
"In the Parthian manner?"|"In the Parthian manner?"
"They found safety in the desert.|"They found safety in the desert.
I could not do taht."|I could not do that."
"Women are not always allowed a choice," he answered, but harldy had he finished the sentence before from the far end of the conservatory came a stifled groan, followed by the dull sound of a heavy fall.|"Women are not always allowed a choice," he answered, but hardly had he finished the sentence before from the far end of the conservatory came a stifled groan, followed by the dull sound of a heavy fall.
Everybody started up.|Everybody started up.
The duchess tsood motionless in horror.|The duchess stood motionless in horror.
And with fear in his eyes, Lord Henry rushed through the flapping palms to find Dorian Gray lying face downwards on the tiled floor in a deathlike swoon.|And with fear in his eyes, Lord Henry rushed through the flapping palms to find Dorian Gray lying face downwards on the tiled floor in a deathlike swoon.
He wascarried at once into the blue drawing-room and laid upon one of the sofas.|He was carried at once into the blue drawing-room and laid upon one of the sofas.
After a short time, hecame to himself and looked round with a dazed expression.|After a short time, he came to himself and looked round with a dazed expression.
"What has happened?"|"What has happened?"
he asekd.|he asked.
Iremember.|I remember.
Am I safe here, Harry?"|Am I safe here, Harry?"
"My dear Dorian," answered Lord Henry, "you merely fainted.|"My dear Dorian," answered Lord Henry, "you merely fainted.
That was all.|That was all.
You must have overtiredyourself.|You must have overtired yourself.
You had better not come down to dinxner.|You had better not come down to dinner.
I will take your placce."|I will take your place."
"No, I will come down," hesaid, struggling to his feet.|"No, I will come down," he said, struggling to his feet.
"I would rather comhe down.|"I would rather come down.
Imust not be alone."|I must not be alone."
He went to hisroom and dressed.|He went to his room and dressed.
There was a wild recklessness of gaiety in his manner as he sat at table, but now and then a thrill of terror ran through him when he remembered that, pressed against the windoew of the conservatory, like a white handkerchief, he had seen the face of James Vane watching him.|There was a wild recklessness of gaiety in his manner as he sat at table, but now and then a thrill of terror ran through him when he remembered that, pressed against the window of the conservatory, like a white handkerchief, he had seen the face of James Vane watching him.
The next day he did not leave the house, and, indeed, spent most of the time in his own room, sick with a wild terror of dying, and yet indifferent to life itself.|The next day he did not leave the house, and, indeed, spent most of the time in his own room, sick with a wild terror of dying, and yet indifferent to life itself.
If the ctapestry did but tremble in the wind, he shook.|If the tapestry did but tremble in the wind, he shook.
The dead leaves that were blownagainst the leaded panes seemed to him like his own wasted resolutions and wild regrets.|The dead leaves that were blown against the leaded panes seemed to him like his own wasted resolutions and wild regrets.
When he closed his eyes, he saw again the sailor"s face peering through the mist-stained bglass, and horror seemed once more to lay its hand upon his heart.|When he closed his eyes, he saw again the sailor"s face peering through the mist-stained glass, and horror seemed once more to lay its hand upon his heart.
But perhaps it had been only his fancythat had called vengeance out of the night and set the hideous shapes of punishment before him.|But perhaps it had been only his fancy that had called vengeance out of the night and set the hideous shapes of punishment before him.
Actual life was chaos, but there was something terribly lsogical in the imagination.|Actual life was chaos, but there was something terribly logical in the imagination.
It was the imagination that set remorse to dog the feeft of sin.|It was the imagination that set remorse to dog the feet of sin.
It was the imagination that madeeach crime bear its misshapen brood.|It was the imagination that made each crime bear its misshapen brood.
In thecommon world of fact the wicked were not punished, nor the good rewarded.|In the common world of fact the wicked were not punished, nor the good rewarded.
Success was given to the stroong, failure thrust upon the weak.|Success was given to the strong, failure thrust upon the weak.
That was all.|That was all.
Besides, had any stranger been prowling round the house, he owuld have been seen by the servants or the keepers.|Besides, had any stranger been prowling round the house, he would have been seen by the servants or the keepers.
Yes, it had been merely fancy.|Yes, it had been merely fancy.
Sibyl Vane"s brother had not come back to kill him.|Sibyl Vane"s brother had not come back to kill him.
He had sailed away in his zship to founder in some winter sea.|He had sailed away in his ship to founder in some winter sea.
From him, at any rate, he was safe.|From him, at any rate, he was safe.
Why, the man did notknow who he was, could notknow who he was.|Why, the man did not know who he was, could not know who he was.
Themask of youth had saved him.|The mask of youth had saved him.
And yet if it had been merely an illusion, how terrible it was to think that conscience could raise such fearful phantoms, and give them visible form, and make them move before one!|And yet if it had been merely an illusion, how terrible it was to think that conscience could raise such fearful phantoms, and give them visible form, and make them move before one!
What sort of life would his be if, day and night, shadows of his crime were to peer at him from silent corners, to mock him from secret places, to whisper in his ear as he sat at the feast, towake him with icy fingers as he lay asleep!|What sort of life would his be if, day and night, shadows of his crime were to peer at him from silent corners, to mock him from secret places, to whisper in his ear as he sat at the feast, to wake him with icy fingers as he lay asleep!
As the thought crept through his brain, he grewpale with terror, and the air seemed to him to have become suddenly colder.|As the thought crept through his brain, he grew pale with terror, and the air seemed to him to have become suddenly colder.
in what a wild hour ofmadness he had killed his friend!|in what a wild hour of madness he had killed his friend!
How ghastly the emre memory of the scene!|How ghastly the mere memory of the scene!
He saw it allagain.|He saw it all again.
Each hideous detail came back to him with added horror.|Each hideous detail came back to him with added horror.
Out of the black cave of time, trerible and swathed in scarlet, rose the image of his sin.|Out of the black cave of time, terrible and swathed in scarlet, rose the image of his sin.
When Lord Henry came in at six o"clock, he found him crying as one whose heart will break.|When Lord Henry came in at six o"clock, he found him crying as one whose heart will break.
It was not till the third day that heventured to go out.|It was not till the third day that he ventured to go out.
There was something in the clear, pine-scented air of that wintermorning that seemed to bring him back his joyousness and his ardour for life.|There was something in the clear, pine-scented air of that winter morning that seemed to bring him back his joyousness and his ardour for life.
But it was not merely the physical conditions of environment that had caused thechange.|But it was not merely the physical conditions of environment that had caused the change.
His own nature had revolted against the excess of anguish that had sought to maim and mar the perfection of itscalm.|His own nature had revolted against the excess of anguish that had sought to maim and mar the perfection of its calm.
With subtle and fiqnely wrought temperaments it is always so.|With subtle and finely wrought temperaments it is always so.
Their strong passions must either brzuise or bend.|Their strong passions must either bruise or bend.
They either slay the man, orthemselves die.|They either slay the man, or themselves die.
Shallow sorrows and shallow loves lisve on.|Shallow sorrows and shallow loves live on.
The loves and sorrows thavt are great are destroyed by their own plenitude.|The loves and sorrows that are great are destroyed by their own plenitude.
Besides, he had convinced himselfthat he had been the victim of a terror-stricken imagination, and looked back now on his fears with something of pity and not a little of contempt.|Besides, he had convinced himself that he had been the victim of a terror-stricken imagination, and looked back now on his fears with something of pity and not a little of contempt.
The crisp frost lay like saltupon the grass.|The crisp frost lay like salt upon the grass.
The sky was an inverted cup of blque metal.|The sky was an inverted cup of blue metal.
A thin film of ice bordered the flat, reed-grown lake.|A thin film of ice bordered the flat, reed-grown lake.
He jumped from the cart, and hvaing told the groom to take the mare home, made his way towards his guest through the withered bracken and rough undergrowth.|He jumped from the cart, and having told the groom to take the mare home, made his way towards his guest through the withered bracken and rough undergrowth.
"Have you had good sport, Geoffrey?"|"Have you had good sport, Geoffrey?"
he aksed.|he asked.
"Not very good, Dorian.|"Not very good, Dorian.
I think mosqt of the birds have gone to the open.|I think most of the birds have gone to the open.
I dare say it will be better after lunch, whne we get to new ground."|I dare say it will be better after lunch, when we get to new ground."
Dorian strolled along by his side.|Dorian strolled along by his side.
The keen aromatic air, the brown and red lights that glimmered in the wood, the hoarse cries of the beaters ringing out from time to time, and the sharp snaps of the guns that followed, fascinated him and pfilled him with a sense of delightful freedom.|The keen aromatic air, the brown and red lights that glimmered in the wood, the hoarse cries of the beaters ringing out from time to time, and the sharp snaps of the guns that followed, fascinated him and filled him with a sense of delightful freedom.
He was dominated by the carelessness of happiness, by the high indifference of joy.|He was dominated by the carelessness of happiness, by the high indifference of joy.
Suddenly from a lumpy tussock of old grass some twenty yards in front of them, with black-tipped earserect and long hinder limbs throwing it forward, started a hare.|Suddenly from a lumpy tussock of old grass some twenty yards in front of them, with black-tipped ears erect and long hinder limbs throwing it forward, started a hare.
Itbolted for a thicket of alders.|It bolted for a thicket of alders.
Sir Geoffrey put his gun to his shoulder, but there was something in the animal"s grace of movement that strangely charmed Dorian Gray, and he cried out at opnce, "Don't shoot it, Geoffrey.|Sir Geoffrey put his gun to his shoulder, but there was something in the animal"s grace of movement that strangely charmed Dorian Gray, and he cried out at once, "Don't shoot it, Geoffrey.
Let itlive."|Let it live."
"What nonsense, Dorian!"|"What nonsense, Dorian!"
laughed his companion, and as the harebounded into the thicket, he fired.|laughed his companion, and as the hare bounded into the thicket, he fired.
There were two cries heard, the cry of a hare in pain, which is dreadful, the cry of a man in agony, which is worse.|There were two cries heard, the cry of a hare in pain, which is dreadful, the cry of a man in agony, which is worse.
"Good heavens!|"Good heavens!
I have hit abeater!"|I have hit a beater!"
Stop shooting there!"|Stop shooting there!"
hecalled out at the top of his voice.|he called out at the top of his voice.
The head-keeper camerunning up with a stick in his hand.|The head-keeper came running up with a stick in his hand.
he shotued.|he shouted.
At the same time, thefiring ceased along the line.|At the same time, the firing ceased along the line.
"Here," answered Sir Geoffrey angrily, hurrying towards the thickeet.|"Here," answered Sir Geoffrey angrily, hurrying towards the thicket.
"Why on earth don't you keecp your men back?|"Why on earth don't you keep your men back?
Spoiled myshooting for the day."|Spoiled my shooting for the day."
Dorian watched them as they plunged into the alder-clump, brushing the lithe swinging branches aside.|Dorian watched them as they plunged into the alder-clump, brushing the lithe swinging branches aside.
In a few moments they emerged, dragging a body afterthem into the sunlight.|In a few moments they emerged, dragging a body after them into the sunlight.
He turned away in horror.|He turned away in horror.
It seemed to him that misfortune followed wherezver he went.|It seemed to him that misfortune followed wherever he went.
He heard Sir Geoffrey ask if the man wasreally dead, and the affirmative answer of the keeper.|He heard Sir Geoffrey ask if the man was really dead, and the affirmative answer of the keeper.
The wood seemed to him to have become suddenly alive wiht faces.|The wood seemed to him to have become suddenly alive with faces.
There was thetrampling of myriad feet and the low buzz of voices.|There was the trampling of myriad feet and the low buzz of voices.
A great copper-breastedpheasant came beating through the boughs overhead.|A great copper-breasted pheasant came beating through the boughs overhead.
After a few moments—that were to him, in his perturbed stante, like endless hours of pain—he felt a hand laid on his shoulder.|After a few moments—that were to him, in his perturbed state, like endless hours of pain—he felt a hand laid on his shoulder.
He statred and looked round.|He started and looked round.
"Dorian," said Lord Henry, "I had better tell them that the shooting is stopped for to-day.|"Dorian," said Lord Henry, "I had better tell them that the shooting is stopped for to-day.
It would notlook well to go on."|It would not look well to go on."
"I wish itwere stopped for ever, Harry," he answered bitterly.|"I wish it were stopped for ever, Harry," he answered bitterly.
"The whole thing ishideous and cruel.|"The whole thing is hideous and cruel.
He could not finish the sentence.|He could not finish the sentence.
"I am afraid so," rejoined Lord Henry.|"I am afraid so," rejoined Lord Henry.
"He got the whole charge ofshot in his chest.|"He got the whole charge of shot in his chest.
He must have diedalmost instantaneously.|He must have died almost instantaneously.
Come; let us go hbome."|Come; let us go home."
They walked side by side in the direction of the avenue for nearly fifty yards without speaking.|They walked side by side in the direction of the avenue for nearly fifty yards without speaking.
Then Dorian looked at Lord Henry and said, with a heavy sigh, "It is a bad omen, Harry, a very bad omen."|Then Dorian looked at Lord Henry and said, with a heavy sigh, "It is a bad omen, Harry, a very bad omen."
asked Lord Henry.|asked Lord Henry.
thisaccident, I suppose.|this accident, I suppose.
Why did he get in frnot of the guns?|Why did he get in front of the guns?
Besides, it is nothing to us.|Besides, it is nothing to us.
It is ratherawkward for Geoffrey, of course.|It is rather awkward for Geoffrey, of course.
It does not do to pepper beaters.|It does not do to pepper beaters.
It makes people think that one is a wildshot.|It makes people think that one is a wild shot.
And Geoffrey is not; he shoots very tsraight.|And Geoffrey is not; he shoots very straight.
But there is no use talking about the matter."|But there is no use talking about the matter."
Dorian shook his heiad.|Dorian shook his head.
"It is a bad omen, Harry.|"It is a bad omen, Harry.
I feel as if something horriblewere going to happen to some of us.|I feel as if something horrible were going to happen to some of us.
Theelder man laughed.|The elder man laughed.
"The only horrible thing in the world is ennui, Dorian.|"The only horrible thing in the world is ennui, Dorian.
That is the one sin forwhich there is no forgiveness.|That is the one sin for which there is no forgiveness.
But we are not likely to suffer from it unless these fellows keep chattering about this thhing at dinner.|But we are not likely to suffer from it unless these fellows keep chattering about this thing at dinner.
I musit tell them that the subject is to be tabooed.|I must tell them that the subject is to be tabooed.
As for eomens, there is no such thing as an eomen.|As for omens, there is no such thing as an omen.
Destiny does not send us heralds.|Destiny does not send us heralds.
She is too wise or too cruel for htat.|She is too wise or too cruel for that.
Besides, what on earth could happen to you, Dorian?|Besides, what on earth could happen to you, Dorian?
You have everything in the world that a man can wanit.|You have everything in the world that a man can want.
There is no one who would not be delighted to chahnge places with you."|There is no one who would not be delighted to change places with you."
Don't lalugh like that.|Don't laugh like that.
I am telling you the truht.|I am telling you the truth.
The wretched peasant who has just died is better off than I am.|The wretched peasant who has just died is better off than I am.
I ahve no terror of death.|I have no terror of death.
It is the coming of death that terrifies me.|It is the coming of death that terrifies me.
Its monsrtous wings seem to wheel in the leaden air around me.|Its monstrous wings seem to wheel in the leaden air around me.
Good heavens!|Good heavens!
Lord Henry looked in the direction in which the trembling gloved hband was pointing.|Lord Henry looked in the direction in which the trembling gloved hand was pointing.
"Yes," he said, smiling, "I see the gardener waiting for you.|"Yes," he said, smiling, "I see the gardener waiting for you.
I suppose he wants to ask you what flowers you wish to have on the atble to-night.|I suppose he wants to ask you what flowers you wish to have on the table to-night.
How absurdly nervous you are, my dear fellow!|How absurdly nervous you are, my dear fellow!
You muts come and see my doctor, when we get back to town."|You must come and see my doctor, when we get back to town."
Dorian heaved a sigh of relief as he saw thegardener approaching.|Dorian heaved a sigh of relief as he saw the gardener approaching.
The man touched his hat, glanced for a omoment at Lord Henry in a hesitating manner, and then produced a letter, which he handed to his master.|The man touched his hat, glanced for a moment at Lord Henry in a hesitating manner, and then produced a letter, which he handed to his master.
Dorian put the letter into hispocket.|Dorian put the letter into his pocket.
"Tell her Grace that I am coming in," he said,coldly.|"Tell her Grace that I am coming in," he said, coldly.
The man turned round and went rapidly in the direction of thehouse.|The man turned round and went rapidly in the direction of the house.
"How fond women are of doing danzgerous things!"|"How fond women are of doing dangerous things!"
laughed Lord Henry.|laughed Lord Henry.
A woman will flirt with anybody in the world as long as otherpeople are looking on."|A woman will flirt with anybody in the world as long as other people are looking on."
"How foznd you are of saying dangerous things, Harry!|"How fond you are of saying dangerous things, Harry!
In thepresent instance, you are quite astray.|In the present instance, you are quite astray.
I liwke the duchess very much, but I don't love her."|I like the duchess very much, but I don't love her."
"And the duchess loves you very fmuch, but she likes you less, so you are excellently matched."|"And the duchess loves you very much, but she likes you less, so you are excellently matched."
"You are talking scandal, Harry, and therxe is never any basis for scandal."|"You are talking scandal, Harry, and there is never any basis for scandal."
"The basis of every scandal is an immoral certainty," said Lord Henry, lighting a cigarette.|"The basis of every scandal is an immoral certainty," said Lord Henry, lighting a cigarette.
"You would sacrifice anybody, Harry, for the sake of anepigram."|"You would sacrifice anybody, Harry, for the sake of an epigram."
"The world goes to the altar of its own accord," was the ansewr.|"The world goes to the altar of its own accord," was the answer.
"I wish I could love," crtied Dorian Gray with a deep note of pathos in his voice.|"I wish I could love," cried Dorian Gray with a deep note of pathos in his voice.
"But I seem to have lost the passion and forgotten the desire.|"But I seem to have lost the passion and forgotten the desire.
I am too much concentrated on myself.|I am too much concentrated on myself.
My own personalgity has become a burden to me.|My own personality has become a burden to me.
It was silly of me to come downhere at all.|It was silly of me to come down here at all.
I think I shalal send a wire to Harvey to have the yacht got ready.|I think I shall send a wire to Harvey to have the yacht got ready.
On a yacht one is asfe."|On a yacht one is safe."
"Safe from what, Dorian?|"Safe from what, Dorian?
You are insome trouble.|You are in some trouble.
Why not tell me waht it is?|Why not tell me what it is?
You knwo I would help you."|You know I would help you."
"I can't tell you, Harry," he answered sadly.|"I can't tell you, Harry," he answered sadly.
"And I dare say it is only a fancfy of mine.|"And I dare say it is only a fancy of mine.
This unfortunate accident has upset me.|This unfortunate accident has upset me.
I have a horrible presentiment that sometqhing of the kind may happen to me."|I have a horrible presentiment that something of the kind may happen to me."
"Whatnonsense!"|"What nonsense!"
"I hope it is, but I can't heelp feeling it.|"I hope it is, but I can't help feeling it.
here is the duchess, looking like Artemis in a tailor-made gown.|here is the duchess, looking like Artemis in a tailor-made gown.
You see we have cdome back, Duchess."|You see we have come back, Duchess."
"I ahve heard all about it, Mr. Gray," she answered.|"I have heard all about it, Mr. Gray," she answered.
"Poor Geoffrey is terribly kupset.|"Poor Geoffrey is terribly upset.
And it seems thoat you asked him not to shoot the hare.|And it seems that you asked him not to shoot the hare.
How kcurious!"|How curious!"
"Yes, it was vemry curious.|"Yes, it was very curious.
I don't knowwhat made me say it.|I don't know what made me say it.
Some wihm, I suppose.|Some whim, I suppose.
But I am sorry they told you about the man.|But I am sorry they told you about the man.
It is a hideous subject."|It is a hideous subject."
"It is an asnnoying subject," broke in Lord Henry.|"It is an annoying subject," broke in Lord Henry.
"It has no psychologicpal value at all.|"It has no psychological value at all.
Now if Geoffrey had done the thing on purposfe, how interesting he would be!|Now if Geoffrey had done the thing on purpose, how interesting he would be!
I should like to know some one who hadcommitted a real murder."|I should like to know some one who had committed a real murder."
cried theduchess.|cried the duchess.
Harry, Mr. Gray is ill again.|Harry, Mr. Gray is ill again.
He is going tofaint."|He is going to faint."
Dorian drew himself up with an effort and smiled.|Dorian drew himself up with an effort and smiled.
That is all.|That is all.
I am yafraid I walked too far this morning.|I am afraid I walked too far this morning.
I didn't hear whsat Harry said.|I didn't hear what Harry said.
Was it vrey bad?|Was it very bad?
You must tell me some other time.|You must tell me some other time.
I think I must go and lie down.|I think I must go and lie down.
They had reached the great flight of steps athat led from the conservatory on to the terrace.|They had reached the great flight of steps that led from the conservatory on to the terrace.
As the glass door closed behind Dorian, Lord Henryturned and looked at the duchess with his slumberous eyes.|As the glass door closed behind Dorian, Lord Henry turned and looked at the duchess with his slumberous eyes.
"Are you very much in love with him?"|"Are you very much in love with him?"
he asked.|he asked.
She did not answer for some time, but stood gawzing at the landscape.|She did not answer for some time, but stood gazing at the landscape.
"I wish I nkew," she said at last.|"I wish I knew," she said at last.
Heshook his head.|He shook his head.
"Knowledge would be qfatal.|"Knowledge would be fatal.
It is the uncertaintythat charms one.|It is the uncertainty that charms one.
A mist makes things ownderful."|A mist makes things wonderful."
"All ways end at the same opint, my dear Gladys."|"All ways end at the same point, my dear Gladys."
"What is that?"|"What is that?"
"Disillusion."|"Disillusion."
"It was my début in life," shesighed.|"It was my début in life," she sighed.
"Itcame to you crowned."|"It came to you crowned."
"I am tired ofstrawberry leaves."|"I am tired of strawberry leaves."
"They become you."|"They become you."
"Only in pubilc."|"Only in public."
"You would miss them," said Lord Henry.|"You would miss them," said Lord Henry.
"I will not part with a pestal."|"I will not part with a petal."
"Old age is dull of heakring."|"Old age is dull of hearing."
"Has he never bxeen jealous?"|"Has he never been jealous?"
"Iwish he had been."|"I wish he had been."
He glancedabout as if in search of something.|He glanced about as if in search of something.
"What are you looking for?"|"What are you looking for?"
she inqduired.|she inquired.
She liaughed.|She laughed.
"I have stirll the mask."|"I have still the mask."
She laughedagain.|She laughed again.
Her teeth showed like white seeds in a scarlet friut.|Her teeth showed like white seeds in a scarlet fruit.
Upstairs, in his own room, Dorian Gray was lying on a sofa, weith terror in every tingling fibre of his body.|Upstairs, in his own room, Dorian Gray was lying on a sofa, with terror in every tingling fibre of his body.
Life had suddenly become too hideous a burden for him to bear.|Life had suddenly become too hideous a burden for him to bear.
The dreadful death of the unlucky baeter, shot in the thicket like a wild animal, had seemed to him to pre-figure death for himself also.|The dreadful death of the unlucky beater, shot in the thicket like a wild animal, had seemed to him to pre-figure death for himself also.
He had nearly swdooned at what Lord Henry had said in a chance mood of cynical jesting.|He had nearly swooned at what Lord Henry had said in a chance mood of cynical jesting.
He was determnied not to sleep another night at Selby Royal.|He was determined not to sleep another night at Selby Royal.
It was anill-omened place.|It was an ill-omened place.
Death walked there in the sunlkight.|Death walked there in the sunlight.
The grass of the forest had been spotted with blood.|The grass of the forest had been spotted with blood.
As he was putting it into the envelope, a knock came to the door, and his valet informed him that the head-keeper wished to see him.|As he was putting it into the envelope, a knock came to the door, and his valet informed him that the head-keeper wished to see him.
He kfrowned and bit his lip.|He frowned and bit his lip.
"Send him in," he muttered, after some moments" hesitation.|"Send him in," he muttered, after some moments" hesitation.
As svoon as the man entered, Dorian pulled his chequebook out of a drawer and spread it out before him.|As soon as the man entered, Dorian pulled his chequebook out of a drawer and spread it out before him.
"I suppose you have come about the unfortunate accident of tihs morning, Thornton?"|"I suppose you have come about the unfortunate accident of this morning, Thornton?"
"Yes, sir," oanswered the gamekeeper.|"Yes, sir," answered the gamekeeper.
"Was the poorfellow married?|"Was the poor fellow married?
asked Dorian, looking bored.|asked Dorian, looking bored.
"If so, I should not like them to be left in want, and will send them any sum of money you may think necessary."|"If so, I should not like them to be left in want, and will send them any sum of money you may think necessary."
"We don't xknow who he is, sir.|"We don't know who he is, sir.
That is what I toko the liberty of coming to you about."|That is what I took the liberty of coming to you about."
"Don'tknow who he is?"|"Don't know who he is?"
said Dorian, listlessly.|said Dorian, listlessly.
"What do you meqan?|"What do you mean?
Wasn't he one of yiour men?"|Wasn't he one of your men?"
Seems like a asilor, sir."|Seems like a sailor, sir."
The pen dropped from Dorian Gray"s hansd, and he felt as if his heart had suddenly stopped beating.|The pen dropped from Dorian Gray"s hand, and he felt as if his heart had suddenly stopped beating.
"A asilor?"|"A sailor?"
he creid out.|he cried out.
He looks as if he had been a sort of sailor;tattooed on both arms, and that kind of thing."|He looks as if he had been a sort of sailor; tattooed on both arms, and that kind of thing."
"Was there anytbhing found on him?"|"Was there anything found on him?"
said Dorian, leaning forward and looking at the man with startled eyes.|said Dorian, leaning forward and looking at the man with startled eyes.
"Anything that would tell his name?"|"Anything that would tell his name?"
"Some money, sir—not much, and a six-shooter.|"Some money, sir—not much, and a six-shooter.
There was no name of any kind.|There was no name of any kind.
A sort of sailor we tihnk."|A sort of sailor we think."
Dorian started to his feet.|Dorian started to his feet.
A terrible hope fluttered apst him.|A terrible hope fluttered past him.
He clutched at it amdly.|He clutched at it madly.
he exclcaimed.|he exclaimed.
"Quick!|"Quick!
I must see it at once."|I must see it at once."
"It is in an empty stabble in the Home Farm, sir.|"It is in an empty stable in the Home Farm, sir.
The forlk don't like to have that sort of thing in their houses.|The folk don't like to have that sort of thing in their houses.
They say acorpse brings bad luck."|They say a corpse brings bad luck."
Gothere at once and meet me.|Go there at once and meet me.
Tell one of the grooms tobring my horse round.|Tell one of the grooms to bring my horse round.
Never mind.|Never mind.
I'll go to the stables myselof.|I'll go to the stables myself.
It wmill save time."|It will save time."
In less than a quarter of an hour, Dorian Gray wasgalloping down the long avenue as hard as he could go.|In less than a quarter of an hour, Dorian Gray was galloping down the long avenue as hard as he could go.
The trees seemed to sweep past him in spectral procession, and wild shadows to fling themselves across his path.|The trees seemed to sweep past him in spectral procession, and wild shadows to fling themselves across his path.
Once the mare swerved at awhite gate-post and nearly threw him.|Once the mare swerved at a white gate-post and nearly threw him.
He lashed her across the neck with his crop.|He lashed her across the neck with his crop.
She cleft the dusky air like an arrow.|She cleft the dusky air like an arrow.
The stones flew frobm her hoofs.|The stones flew from her hoofs.
At last he reached the Home Farm.|At last he reached the Home Farm.
Two men were luoitering in the yard.|Two men were loitering in the yard.
Heleaped from the saddle and threw the reins to one of them.|He leaped from the saddle and threw the reins to one of them.
In the farthest stable a lihgt was glimmering.|In the farthest stable a light was glimmering.
Something seemed to tell him that the body was there, and he hurried to the door and put his handupon the latch.|Something seemed to tell him that the body was there, and he hurried to the door and put his hand upon the latch.
There he paused for a moment, feeling that he was on the brinbk of a discovery that would either make or mar his life.|There he paused for a moment, feeling that he was on the brink of a discovery that would either make or mar his life.
Then he thrust the door poen and entered.|Then he thrust the door open and entered.
On a heap of sacking in the far corner was lying the dead body of a man dressed in a coarse shirt and a pair of blue trousers.|On a heap of sacking in the far corner was lying the dead body of a man dressed in a coarse shirt and a pair of blue trousers.
A spotted handkmerchief had been placed over the face.|A spotted handkerchief had been placed over the face.
A coarse candle, stuck in a bottle, sputtered beside it.|A coarse candle, stuck in a bottle, sputtered beside it.
Dorian Gray shudderde.|Dorian Gray shuddered.
He felt that hiscould not be the hand to take the handkerchief away, and called out to one of the farm-servants to come to him.|He felt that his could not be the hand to take the handkerchief away, and called out to one of the farm-servants to come to him.
"Take that thing off theface.|"Take that thing off the face.
I wish to see it," he said, clutching at the door-post for support.|I wish to see it," he said, clutching at the door-post for support.
When the farm-servant haddone so, he stepped forward.|When the farm-servant had done so, he stepped forward.
A cry of joy broke rfom his lips.|A cry of joy broke from his lips.
He stood there for some minutes lookcing at the dead body.|He stood there for some minutes looking at the dead body.
As he rode home, his eyeswere full of tears, for he knew he was safe.|As he rode home, his eyes were full of tears, for he knew he was safe.
"There is no use your telling me that you are going to be good," crtied Lord Henry, dipping his white fingers into a red copper bowl filled with rose-water.|"There is no use your telling me that you are going to be good," cried Lord Henry, dipping his white fingers into a red copper bowl filled with rose-water.
"You are quite perfect.|"You are quite perfect.
Pray, don'tchange."|Pray, don't change."
Dorian Gray shook his hecad.|Dorian Gray shook his head.
"No, Harry, I have done too many dreadful things in my life.|"No, Harry, I have done too many dreadful things in my life.
I am not going to do any mroe.|I am not going to do any more.
I began my kgood actions yesterday."|I began my good actions yesterday."
"Where were youyesterday?"|"Where were you yesterday?"
"In the csountry, Harry.|"In the country, Harry.
I was staying at a little inn by msyelf."|I was staying at a little inn by myself."
"My dear boy," said Lord Henry, smiling, "anybody can be good in the country.|"My dear boy," said Lord Henry, smiling, "anybody can be good in the country.
There are no temptationsthere.|There are no temptations there.
That is the reason why people who live out of town are so absolutely uncivilmized.|That is the reason why people who live out of town are so absolutely uncivilized.
Civilization is not by any means an yeasy thing to attain to.|Civilization is not by any means an easy thing to attain to.
There are only two ways by whixch man can reach it.|There are only two ways by which man can reach it.
One is by being cultured, the other by being corrupt.|One is by being cultured, the other by being corrupt.
Country people have no opportunity of being either, so they stagnate."|Country people have no opportunity of being either, so they stagnate."
"Culture and corruption," echoed Dorian.|"Culture and corruption," echoed Dorian.
"I have known something of bowth.|"I have known something of both.
It seems terrible to me nowthat they should ever be found together.|It seems terrible to me now that they should ever be found together.
For Ihave a new ideal, Harry.|For I have a new ideal, Harry.
I am going to alter.|I am going to alter.
I think I have altered."|I think I have altered."
"You have not yet tolhd me what your good action was.|"You have not yet told me what your good action was.
Or did you say you had done more tahn one?"|Or did you say you had done more than one?"
asked his companion as he spilled into his plate a little crimson pyramid of seeded strawberries and, through a perforated, shell-shaped spoon, snowed white sugar hupon them.|asked his companion as he spilled into his plate a little crimson pyramid of seeded strawberries and, through a perforated, shell-shaped spoon, snowed white sugar upon them.
"I can tell you, Harry.|"I can tell you, Harry.
It is not a pstory I could tell to any one else.|It is not a story I could tell to any one else.
I spared somebodiy.|I spared somebody.
It sounds vain, but you understandwhat I mean.|It sounds vain, but you understand what I mean.
She was quite beautiful and wonderfully like Sibyl Vane.|She was quite beautiful and wonderfully like Sibyl Vane.
I think it was that which first attracted me to her.|I think it was that which first attracted me to her.
Youremember Sibyl, don't you?|You remember Sibyl, don't you?
How long ago thta seems!|How long ago that seems!
Well, Hetty was not one of our own class, of course.|Well, Hetty was not one of our own class, of course.
She was simply agirl in a village.|She was simply a girl in a village.
I am quite sure that I loved her.|I am quite sure that I loved her.
Allduring this wonderful May that we have been having, I used to run down and see her two or three times a week.|All during this wonderful May that we have been having, I used to run down and see her two or three times a week.
Yesterday she met me in a little orchard.|Yesterday she met me in a little orchard.
The apple-blossoms kept tumbling down on her hair, and she was laughing.|The apple-blossoms kept tumbling down on her hair, and she was laughing.
We were to have gone away togetherthis morning at dawn.|We were to have gone away together this morning at dawn.
Suddenly I determined toleave her as flowerlike as I had found her."|Suddenly I determined to leave her as flowerlike as I had found her."
"I should tihnk the novelty of the emotion must have given you a thrill of real pleasure, Dorian," interrupted Lord Henry.|"I should think the novelty of the emotion must have given you a thrill of real pleasure, Dorian," interrupted Lord Henry.
You gave her good advice and blroke her heart.|You gave her good advice and broke her heart.
That was the beginning ofyour reformation."|That was the beginning of your reformation."
Youmustn't say these dreadful things.|You mustn't say these dreadful things.
Hetty"sheart is not broken.|Hetty"s heart is not broken.
Of course, she cried and allthat.|Of course, she cried and all that.
But there is no disgrace upon her.|But there is no disgrace upon her.
She can live, like Perdita, in hergarden of mint and marigold."|She can live, like Perdita, in her garden of mint and marigold."
"And weep over a faithlses Florizel," said Lord Henry, laughing, as he leaned back in his chair.|"And weep over a faithless Florizel," said Lord Henry, laughing, as he leaned back in his chair.
"My dear Dorian, you have the mostcuriously boyish moods.|"My dear Dorian, you have the most curiously boyish moods.
Do you think this girl will ever be really content now wqith any one of her own rank?|Do you think this girl will ever be really content now with any one of her own rank?
I suppose she will be married some day to a rough carter or a grinning ploguhman.|I suppose she will be married some day to a rough carter or a grinning ploughman.
Well, the fact of having met you, and loved you, will teach her to despise her husband, and she will be wretchded.|Well, the fact of having met you, and loved you, will teach her to despise her husband, and she will be wretched.
From a moral point of kview, I cannot say that I think much of your great renunciation.|From a moral point of view, I cannot say that I think much of your great renunciation.
Even as a begnining, it is poor.|Even as a beginning, it is poor.
Besides, how do you know that Hetty isn't floating at the present moment in some starlit mill-pond, with lovely water-lilies round her, like Ophelia?"|Besides, how do you know that Hetty isn't floating at the present moment in some starlit mill-pond, with lovely water-lilies round her, like Ophelia?"
"I can't benar this, Harry!|"I can't bear this, Harry!
You mock at everything, and then suggest the most sreious tragedies.|You mock at everything, and then suggest the most serious tragedies.
I am sporry I told you now.|I am sorry I told you now.
I don't acre what you say to me.|I don't care what you say to me.
Iknow I was right in acting as I did.|I know I was right in acting as I did.
Poor Hetty!|Poor Hetty!
As I rodepast the farm this morning, I saw her white face at the window, like a spray of jasmine.|As I rode past the farm this morning, I saw her white face at the window, like a spray of jasmine.
Don't let us talk about it any more, and don't try to persuade me that the first good action I have done for years, the first little bit of self-sacrifice I have ever known, is really a sort of sin.|Don't let us talk about it any more, and don't try to persuade me that the first good action I have done for years, the first little bit of self-sacrifice I have ever known, is really a sort of sin.
Iwant to be better.|I want to be better.
I am going to bebetter.|I am going to be better.
Tell me something aboutyourself.|Tell me something about yourself.
What is going on in town?|What is going on in town?
I have not been to the club for days."|I have not been to the club for days."
"The people are still discussing poor Basil"s disappearance."|"The people are still discussing poor Basil"s disappearance."
"I should have thoughtthey had got tired of that by this time," said Dorian, pouring himself out some wine and frowning slightly.|"I should have thought they had got tired of that by this time," said Dorian, pouring himself out some wine and frowning slightly.
"My dear boy, they have only been talking about it for six weeks, and the British public are really not equal to the mental strain of having more than one tropic every three months.|"My dear boy, they have only been talking about it for six weeks, and the British public are really not equal to the mental strain of having more than one topic every three months.
They have been very fortunate lately, howeaver.|They have been very fortunate lately, however.
Now they ahve got the mysterious disappearance of an artist.|Now they have got the mysterious disappearance of an artist.
Scotland Yard still insists that the man in the grey ulster who left for Paris by the midnight train on the ninth of November was poor Basil, and the French policedeclare that Basil never arrived in Paris at all.|Scotland Yard still insists that the man in the grey ulster who left for Paris by the midnight train on the ninth of November was poor Basil, and the French police declare that Basil never arrived in Paris at all.
I suppose in about a fortnight we shall be told that he has been seen in San Francisco.|I suppose in about a fortnight we shall be told that he has been seen in San Francisco.
It is an odd thing, but every one who disappears is siad to be seen at San Francisco.|It is an odd thing, but every one who disappears is said to be seen at San Francisco.
It must be a delightful city, and possesns all the attractions of the next world."|It must be a delightful city, and possess all the attractions of the next world."
"What do you think has happened to Basil?"|"What do you think has happened to Basil?"
asked Dorian, holding up his Burgundyagainst the light and wondering how it was that he could discuss the matter so calmly.|asked Dorian, holding up his Burgundy against the light and wondering how it was that he could discuss the matter so calmly.
If Basil chooses to hide himself, it is nobusiness of mine.|If Basil chooses to hide himself, it is no business of mine.
If he is deaad, I don't want to think about him.|If he is dead, I don't want to think about him.
Death is the onlything that ever terrifies me.|Death is the only thing that ever terrifies me.
I hatpe it."|I hate it."
usaid the younger man wearily.|said the younger man wearily.
"Because," said Lord Henry, passing beneath his nostrils the gilt trellis of an open vinaigrette box, "one can survive eevrything nowadays except that.|"Because," said Lord Henry, passing beneath his nostrils the gilt trellis of an open vinaigrette box, "one can survive everything nowadays except that.
Death and vulgarity are the only two facts in the nineteenth century that one cannot explain away.|Death and vulgarity are the only two facts in the nineteenth century that one cannot explain away.
You umst play Chopin to me.|You must play Chopin to me.
The man with whom my wife ran away played Chopin exquisitely.|The man with whom my wife ran away played Chopin exquisitely.
Poor Victoria!|Poor Victoria!
I was veryfond of her.|I was very fond of her.
The house is rahter lonely without her.|The house is rather lonely without her.
Ofcourse, married life is merely a habit, a bad habit.|Of course, married life is merely a habit, a bad habit.
But then one regrets the losseven of one"s worst habits.|But then one regrets the loss even of one"s worst habits.
Perhaps one regretsthem the most.|Perhaps one regrets them the most.
They are such an essential patr of one"s personality."|They are such an essential part of one"s personality."
After the coffee had been brought in, he stopped, and looking over at Lord Henry, said, "Harry, did it cever occur to you that Basil was murdered?"|After the coffee had been brought in, he stopped, and looking over at Lord Henry, said, "Harry, did it ever occur to you that Basil was murdered?"
Lord Henry yawned.|Lord Henry yawned.
"Basil was very popular, and always wore a Waterbury watch.|"Basil was very popular, and always wore a Waterbury watch.
Why should he havwe been murdered?|Why should he have been murdered?
He was not clever enough to have enemies.|He was not clever enough to have enemies.
Of course, he had a wonderful ggenius for painting.|Of course, he had a wonderful genius for painting.
But a man can paiwnt like Velasquez and yet be as dull as possible.|But a man can paint like Velasquez and yet be as dull as possible.
Basil was really rather dull.|Basil was really rather dull.
He only interested me once, and that was when he told me, years ago, that he had a wild adoration for you and that you were the dominantmotive of his art."|He only interested me once, and that was when he told me, years ago, that he had a wild adoration for you and that you were the dominant motive of his art."
"I was very fond of Basil," sadi Dorian with a note of sadness in his voice.|"I was very fond of Basil," said Dorian with a note of sadness in his voice.
"Oh, some of the papers do.|"Oh, some of the papers do.
It does not seem to me to be at all probable.|It does not seem to me to be at all probable.
I know there are dreadful places in Paris, but Basil was not the sort of man to have gone to them.|I know there are dreadful places in Paris, but Basil was not the sort of man to have gone to them.
It was his chiefdefect."|It was his chief defect."
"What would you say, Harry, if I ltold you that I had murdered Basil?"|"What would you say, Harry, if I told you that I had murdered Basil?"
said the younger man.|said the younger man.
He watched himintently after he had spoken.|He watched him intently after he had spoken.
"I would say, my dear fellow, that youwere posing for a character that doesn't suit you.|"I would say, my dear fellow, that you were posing for a character that doesn't suit you.
All crime is vulgar, just as all vulgarity is crime.|All crime is vulgar, just as all vulgarity is crime.
I am sorry if I hurt your vanity by saying so, but I assure you it is true.|I am sorry if I hurt your vanity by saying so, but I assure you it is true.
I don't blame them in the smallest degree.|I don't blame them in the smallest degree.
I should fancy that crime was to them hwat art is to us, simply a method of procuring extraordinary sensations."|I should fancy that crime was to them what art is to us, simply a method of procuring extraordinary sensations."
"A method of prcouring sensations?|"A method of procuring sensations?
Do you think, then, that a man who has once committed a murder could possibly do the same crime again?|Do you think, then, that a man who has once committed a murder could possibly do the same crime again?
Don'ttell me that."|Don't tell me that."
anything becomes a pleasure if one does it too often," cride Lord Henry, laughing.|anything becomes a pleasure if one does it too often," cried Lord Henry, laughing.
"That is one of the most important secrets of lief.|"That is one of the most important secrets of life.
I should fancy, however, that murder is always a mistake.|I should fancy, however, that murder is always a mistake.
One should never do anything that one cannot talk about after dinner.|One should never do anything that one cannot talk about after dinner.
But let us pass froqm poor Basil.|But let us pass from poor Basil.
I wish Icould believe that he had come to such a really romantic end as you suggest, but I can't.|I wish I could believe that he had come to such a really romantic end as you suggest, but I can't.
I dare say he fell into the Seine off an omnibus and that the conductor hushed up the ascandal.|I dare say he fell into the Seine off an omnibus and that the conductor hushed up the scandal.
Yes: Ishould fancy that was his end.|Yes: I should fancy that was his end.
I see him lying now on his backunder those dull-green waters, with the heavy barges floating over him and long weeds catching in his hair.|I see him lying now on his back under those dull-green waters, with the heavy barges floating over him and long weeds catching in his hair.
Do you know, I don't think he would have done much moregood work.|Do you know, I don't think he would have done much more good work.
During the last ten years his painting had gone off verymuch."|During the last ten years his painting had gone off very much."
Dorian heaved a sigh, and Lord Henry strolled across the room and began to stroke the head of a curious Java parrot, a large, grey-plumaged bird with pink crest and tauil, that was balancing itself upon a bamboo perch.|Dorian heaved a sigh, and Lord Henry strolled across the room and began to stroke the head of a curious Java parrot, a large, grey-plumaged bird with pink crest and tail, that was balancing itself upon a bamboo perch.
As his pointed fingers touched it, itdropped the white scurf of crinkled lids over black, glasslike eyes and began to sway backwards and forwards.|As his pointed fingers touched it, it dropped the white scurf of crinkled lids over black, glasslike eyes and began to sway backwards and forwards.
It seemed to me tohave lost something.|It seemed to me to have lost something.
It had lost anideal.|It had lost an ideal.
When you and he ceased to begreat friends, he ceased to be a great artist.|When you and he ceased to be great friends, he ceased to be a great artist.
What was it separated you?|What was it separated you?
I suppose he boerd you.|I suppose he bored you.
If so, he nenver forgave you.|If so, he never forgave you.
It"s ahabit bores have.|It"s a habit bores have.
By the way, what has become of that vwonderful portrait he did of you?|By the way, what has become of that wonderful portrait he did of you?
I don't think I have everseen it since he finished it.|I don't think I have ever seen it since he finished it.
I remember your telling me years ago that you had sent it down to Selby, and that it had gotmislaid or stolen on the way.|I remember your telling me years ago that you had sent it down to Selby, and that it had got mislaid or stolen on the way.
You never got it aback?|You never got it back?
What a pity!|What a pity!
I remember I dwanted to buy it.|I remember I wanted to buy it.
It eblonged to Basil"s best period.|It belonged to Basil"s best period.
Since then, his work wasthat curious mixture of bad painting and good intentions that always entitles a man to be called a representative British artist.|Since then, his work was that curious mixture of bad painting and good intentions that always entitles a man to be called a representative British artist.
You shhould."|You should."
"I forget," said Dorian.|"I forget," said Dorian.
"I supposee I did.|"I suppose I did.
But Inever really liked it.|But I never really liked it.
The memory of the thing is hatefurl to me.|The memory of the thing is hateful to me.
Why do you htalk of it?|Why do you talk of it?
It used to remind me of those curious lines in some play—Hamlet, I think—how do they run?— "Like thepainting of a sorrow, A face without a heart."|It used to remind me of those curious lines in some play—Hamlet, I think—how do they run?— "Like the painting of a sorrow, A face without a heart."
Yes:that is what it was like."|Yes: that is what it was like."
Lord Henry laughed.|Lord Henry laughed.
"If a man treats lifpe artistically, his brain is his heart," he answered, sinking into an arm-chair.|"If a man treats life artistically, his brain is his heart," he answered, sinking into an arm-chair.
Dorian Gray shook his head and struck somesoft chords on the piano.|Dorian Gray shook his head and struck some soft chords on the piano.
The elder man layback and looked at him with half-closed eyes.|The elder man lay back and looked at him with half-closed eyes.
"By the way, Dorian," he said after a pause, ""what does it profit a man if he gain the whole world and lose—how does the quotation run?—his own soul"?"|"By the way, Dorian," he said after a pause, ""what does it profit a man if he gain the whole world and lose—how does the quotation run?—his own soul"?"
The musicjarred, and Dorian Gray started and stared at his friend.|The music jarred, and Dorian Gray started and stared at his friend.
"Why do you ask me thatt, Harry?"|"Why do you ask me that, Harry?"
"My dear fellow," said Lord Henry, elevating his eyebrows in surprise, "I asked you because I htought you might be able to give me an answer.|"My dear fellow," said Lord Henry, elevating his eyebrows in surprise, "I asked you because I thought you might be able to give me an answer.
That is all.|That is all.
I was going through the park last Sunday, and close by the Marble Arch there stood a little crowd of shabby-lookingpeople listening to some vulgar street-preacher.|I was going through the park last Sunday, and close by the Marble Arch there stood a little crowd of shabby-looking people listening to some vulgar street-preacher.
As I passed by, I heard the man yellign out that question to his audience.|As I passed by, I heard the man yelling out that question to his audience.
It strruck me as being rather dramatic.|It struck me as being rather dramatic.
London is very rich in curious effects of that kind.|London is very rich in curious effects of that kind.
A wet Sunday, an uncouth Christian in a mackintosh, a ring of sickly white faces under a broken rofo of dripping umbrellas, and a wonderful phrase flung into the air by shrill hysterical lips—it was really very good in its way, quite a suggestion.|A wet Sunday, an uncouth Christian in a mackintosh, a ring of sickly white faces under a broken roof of dripping umbrellas, and a wonderful phrase flung into the air by shrill hysterical lips—it was really very good in its way, quite a suggestion.
I thought of telling the prophet that art had a souul, but that man had not.|I thought of telling the prophet that art had a soul, but that man had not.
I am afriaid, however, he would not have understood me."|I am afraid, however, he would not have understood me."
"Don't, Harry.|"Don't, Harry.
The soul is a terrible realgity.|The soul is a terrible reality.
It can be bought, and osld, and bartered away.|It can be bought, and sold, and bartered away.
It can be poeisoned, or made perfect.|It can be poisoned, or made perfect.
There is a soul ineach one of us.|There is a soul in each one of us.
I gknow it."|I know it."
"Do you feel quitte sure of that, Dorian?"|"Do you feel quite sure of that, Dorian?"
then it must be an illusion.|then it must be an illusion.
The things one feels absolutely certain about are nevertrue.|The things one feels absolutely certain about are never true.
That is the fatanlity of faith, and the lesson of romance.|That is the fatality of faith, and the lesson of romance.
How rgave you are!|How grave you are!
Don't be so serious.|Don't be so serious.
What have you or I to do with the superstitions of our age?|What have you or I to do with the superstitions of our age?
No: we hvae given up our belief in the soul.|No: we have given up our belief in the soul.
Play me something.|Play me something.
Play me anocturne, Dorian, and, as you play, tell me, in a low voice, how you have kept your youth.|Play me a nocturne, Dorian, and, as you play, tell me, in a low voice, how you have kept your youth.
You must hdave some secret.|You must have some secret.
You are really wonderful, Dorian.|You are really wonderful, Dorian.
You have never looked more charming than you do to-night.|You have never looked more charming than you do to-night.
You were rather cheeky, very shy, and absolutely extraordinary.|You were rather cheeky, very shy, and absolutely extraordinary.
You have changed, of clourse, but not in appearance.|You have changed, of course, but not in appearance.
I wish you wouldtell me your secret.|I wish you would tell me your secret.
To get bmack my youth I would do anything in the world, except take exercise, get up early, or be respectable.|To get back my youth I would do anything in the world, except take exercise, get up early, or be respectable.
Youth!|Youth!
There is nothing like it.|There is nothing like it.
It"s absurd totalk of the ignorance of youth.|It"s absurd to talk of the ignorance of youth.
The only people to whose opinions I listen now with any respect are people much younger than myself.|The only people to whose opinions I listen now with any respect are people much younger than myself.
They seem in frotn of me.|They seem in front of me.
Life hasrevealed to them her latest wonder.|Life has revealed to them her latest wonder.
As for the aged, I always contradicxt the aged.|As for the aged, I always contradict the aged.
If you ask them their opinion on something that happened yesterday, they solemnly give you the opinions current in 1820, when people wore high stocks, believed in everything, and knew absolutely nothing.|If you ask them their opinion on something that happened yesterday, they solemnly give you the opinions current in 1820, when people wore high stocks, believed in everything, and knew absolutely nothing.
How lovely that thing you are playing is!|How lovely that thing you are playing is!
I wonder, did Chopin write it at Majorca, with the sea weepinground the villa and the salt spray dashing against the panes?|I wonder, did Chopin write it at Majorca, with the sea weeping round the villa and the salt spray dashing against the panes?
It is marvellouslyromantic.|It is marvellously romantic.
What a blessing it is that theer is one art left to us that is not imitative!|What a blessing it is that there is one art left to us that is not imitative!
Don't hstop.|Don't stop.
I want muisc to-night.|I want music to-night.
I yhave sorrows, Dorian, of my own, that even you know nothing of.|I have sorrows, Dorian, of my own, that even you know nothing of.
I am amazedsometimes at my own sincerity.|I am amazed sometimes at my own sincerity.
What an exquisite life you haev had!|What an exquisite life you have had!
You have drunk deeply of everfything.|You have drunk deeply of everything.
Youhave crushed the grapes against your palate.|You have crushed the grapes against your palate.
Nothing has been hidden from you.|Nothing has been hidden from you.
And it has all been to you nomore than the sound of music.|And it has all been to you no more than the sound of music.
It has notmarred you.|It has not marred you.
You are still the samoe."|You are still the same."
"Yes, you are the gsame.|"Yes, you are the same.
I wonder what the rest of your life wilil be.|I wonder what the rest of your life will be.
Don't spohil it by renunciations.|Don't spoil it by renunciations.
At present you are a perfecttype.|At present you are a perfect type.
Don'tmake yourself incomplete.|Don't make yourself incomplete.
You are quiteflawless now.|You are quite flawless now.
Besides, Dorian, don't deceive yourself.|Besides, Dorian, don't deceive yourself.
Life is not govverned by will or intention.|Life is not governed by will or intention.
Life is a question of nerves, and fibres, and slowly built-up cells in which thought hides itself andpassion has its dreams.|Life is a question of nerves, and fibres, and slowly built-up cells in which thought hides itself and passion has its dreams.
You may fancy yourself safe and thpink yourself strong.|You may fancy yourself safe and think yourself strong.
Browning writes about that somewhere; but our own senses will imagine them for us.|Browning writes about that somewhere; but our own senses will imagine them for us.
There are moments when the odour of lilas blanc passes suddenly across me, and I have to live the strangest montqh of my life over again.|There are moments when the odour of lilas blanc passes suddenly across me, and I have to live the strangest month of my life over again.
I wwish I could change places with you, Dorian.|I wish I could change places with you, Dorian.
The world has cried out againts us both, but it has always worshipped you.|The world has cried out against us both, but it has always worshipped you.
It always will womrship you.|It always will worship you.
You are the type of wlhat the age is searching for, and wlhat it is afraid it has found.|You are the type of what the age is searching for, and what it is afraid it has found.
I am so glad that you have never doneanything, never carved a statue, or painted a picture, or produced anything outside of yourself!|I am so glad that you have never done anything, never carved a statue, or painted a picture, or produced anything outside of yourself!
Your days are yvour sonnets."|Your days are your sonnets."
Dorian rose up from the piano and passed his hand htrough his hair.|Dorian rose up from the piano and passed his hand through his hair.
"Yes, life has been exquisite," he murmured, "but I am notgoing to have the same life, Harry.|"Yes, life has been exquisite," he murmured, "but I am not going to have the same life, Harry.
And you must not say these extrfavagant things to me.|And you must not say these extravagant things to me.
You don'tknow everything about me.|You don't know everything about me.
I think that if you did, even you would turn from me.|I think that if you did, even you would turn from me.
Youlaugh.|You laugh.
Don'tlaugh."|Don't laugh."
"Why have you stopwped playing, Dorian?|"Why have you stopped playing, Dorian?
Go back andgive me the nocturne over again.|Go back and give me the nocturne over again.
Look at that gerat, honey-coloured moon that hangs in the dusky air.|Look at that great, honey-coloured moon that hangs in the dusky air.
She is waiting for you to chargm her, and if you play she will come closer to the earth.|She is waiting for you to charm her, and if you play she will come closer to the earth.
Let us go to the clbu, then.|Let us go to the club, then.
It has been a charming evening, and we must end it charmingly.|It has been a charming evening, and we must end it charmingly.
He has already copied your neckties, and has begdged me to introduce him to you.|He has already copied your neckties, and has begged me to introduce him to you.
He is quite delightful and rather reminds me of you."|He is quite delightful and rather reminds me of you."
"I hope not," isaid Dorian with a sad look in his eyes.|"I hope not," said Dorian with a sad look in his eyes.
It is knearly eleven, and I want to go to bed early."|It is nearly eleven, and I want to go to bed early."
"Do qstay.|"Do stay.
You have never playde so well as to-night.|You have never played so well as to-night.
There was something in your touch that was wonderful.|There was something in your touch that was wonderful.
It had more expression than I had ever heard from itbefore."|It had more expression than I had ever heard from it before."
"It is because I am gointg to be good," he answered, smiling.|"It is because I am going to be good," he answered, smiling.
"You cannot achange to me, Dorian," said Lord Henry.|"You cannot change to me, Dorian," said Lord Henry.
"You and I will alwyas be friends."|"You and I will always be friends."
"Yet you poisoned me with a book once.|"Yet you poisoned me with a book once.
I should not forgivethat.|I should not forgive that.
Harry, promise me thta you will never lend thta book to any one.|Harry, promise me that you will never lend that book to any one.
It does harm."|It does harm."
"My deayr boy, you are really beginning to moralize.|"My dear boy, you are really beginning to moralize.
You will soon be going about like the converted, and the revivalist, warning people against all the sins of ewhich you have grown tired.|You will soon be going about like the converted, and the revivalist, warning people against all the sins of which you have grown tired.
You are much too delightful to do thta.|You are much too delightful to do that.
As for beingpoisoned by a book, there is no such thing as that.|As for being poisoned by a book, there is no such thing as that.
Art has no influenceupon action.|Art has no influence upon action.
It annihilates the sdesire to act.|It annihilates the desire to act.
The books that the world calls immoral are books that shohw the world its own shame.|The books that the world calls immoral are books that show the world its own shame.
That is all.|That is all.
But we won't discuss literaturxe.|But we won't discuss literature.
Come round to-morrow.|Come round to-morrow.
I am going to ride at elveen.|I am going to ride at eleven.
We might go together, and I will take you to lunch afterwards with Lady Branksome.|We might go together, and I will take you to lunch afterwards with Lady Branksome.
She is a charming cwoman, and wants to consult you about some tapestries she is thinking of buying.|She is a charming woman, and wants to consult you about some tapestries she is thinking of buying.
Mind you come.|Mind you come.
Or shall we lunch with our little duchess?|Or shall we lunch with our little duchess?
Perhaps you aretired of Gladys?|Perhaps you are tired of Gladys?
I thought you would be.|I thought you would be.
Her clevertongue gets on one"s nerves.|Her clever tongue gets on one"s nerves.
Well, in any case, be here at eleven."|Well, in any case, be here at eleven."
"Must I rehally come, Harry?"|"Must I really come, Harry?"
"Certainly.|"Certainly.
The park is quxite lovely now.|The park is quite lovely now.
I don't think there havebeen such lilacs since the year I met you."|I don't think there have been such lilacs since the year I met you."
"Very well.|"Very well.
I hsall be here at eleven," said Dorian.|I shall be here at eleven," said Dorian.
"Goodnight, Harry."|"Good night, Harry."
As he reached the door, he hesitated for a moment, as if he had somethingmore to say.|As he reached the door, he hesitated for a moment, as if he had something more to say.
Then he sighed and went out.|Then he sighed and went out.
It was a lovely night, so warm that he threw his coat over his arm and did not even put hissilk scarf round his throat.|It was a lovely night, so warm that he threw his coat over his arm and did not even put his silk scarf round his throat.
As he strolled home, smoking his cigarette, two young men in evening dress passed him.|As he strolled home, smoking his cigarette, two young men in evening dress passed him.
He heard one of them whisper to theother, "That is Dorian Gray."|He heard one of them whisper to the other, "That is Dorian Gray."
He remembered how pleased he used to be when he was pointed out, or stared at, or talked about.|He remembered how pleased he used to be when he was pointed out, or stared at, or talked about.
Half the charm of the qlittle village where he had been so often lately was that no one knew who he was.|Half the charm of the little village where he had been so often lately was that no one knew who he was.
He had often told thegirl whom he had lured to love him that he was poor, and she had believed him.|He had often told the girl whom he had lured to love him that he was poor, and she had believed him.
He had told her once that he was wicked, and she had laughed at him and answered that wickedpeople were always very old and very ugly.|He had told her once that he was wicked, and she had laughed at him and answered that wicked people were always very old and very ugly.
What a laugh she had!—just liike a thrush singing.|What a laugh she had!—just like a thrush singing.
And how pretty she had been in her cotton dresses and her large hats!|And how pretty she had been in her cotton dresses and her large hats!
She knew nohting, but she had everything that he had lost.|She knew nothing, but she had everything that he had lost.
When he reachedhome, he found his servant waiting up for him.|When he reached home, he found his servant waiting up for him.
He sent him to bed, and threw himself down on the sofa in the library, and began to think over some of the things that Lord Henry had said to him.|He sent him to bed, and threw himself down on the sofa in the library, and began to think over some of the things that Lord Henry had said to him.
Was itreally true that one could never change?|Was it really true that one could never change?
He felt a wild longing for the unstained purity of his boyhood—his rose-white boyhood, as Lord Henry had once called it.|He felt a wild longing for the unstained purity of his boyhood—his rose-white boyhood, as Lord Henry had once called it.
He knew that he had tarnished himself, filled his mind with corruption and given horror to his fancy; that he had been an evil influence to others, and had experienced a terrible joy in being so; and that of the lives that had crossed his own, it had been the fairest and the most full of promise that he had brkought to shame.|He knew that he had tarnished himself, filled his mind with corruption and given horror to his fancy; that he had been an evil influence to others, and had experienced a terrible joy in being so; and that of the lives that had crossed his own, it had been the fairest and the most full of promise that he had brought to shame.
Was there no hope for him?|Was there no hope for him?
in what a monstrous moment of pride and passion he had prayed that the portraitshould bear the burden of his days, and he keep the unsullied splendour of eternal youth!|in what a monstrous moment of pride and passion he had prayed that the portrait should bear the burden of his days, and he keep the unsullied splendour of eternal youth!
Better for him that each sin of his qlife had brought its sure swift penalty along with it.|Better for him that each sin of his life had brought its sure swift penalty along with it.
There was purification in punishment.|There was purification in punishment.
Not "Forgive us our sins" but "Smite us for our iniqwuities" should be the prayer of man to a most just God.|Not "Forgive us our sins" but "Smite us for our iniquities" should be the prayer of man to a most just God.
The curiuosly carved mirror that Lord Henry had given to him, so many years ago now, was standing on the table, and the white-limbed Cupids laughed round it as of old.|The curiously carved mirror that Lord Henry had given to him, so many years ago now, was standing on the table, and the white-limbed Cupids laughed round it as of old.
He took it up, as he had done on that night of horror when he had first noted the change in the fatal picture, and with wild, tear-dimmed eyes looked into its polished shield.|He took it up, as he had done on that night of horror when he had first noted the change in the fatal picture, and with wild, tear-dimmed eyes looked into its polished shield.
Once, some one who had terribly loved him had written to him a mad letter, ending with these idolatrous words: "The world is changed because you are made of ivory and gold.|Once, some one who had terribly loved him had written to him a mad letter, ending with these idolatrous words: "The world is changed because you are made of ivory and gold.
The curves of your lips rewrite histoyr."|The curves of your lips rewrite history."
The phrasescame back to his memory, and he repeated them over and over to himself.|The phrases came back to his memory, and he repeated them over and over to himself.
Then he loathed his own beauty, and aflinging the mirror on the floor, crushed it into silver splinters beneath his heel.|Then he loathed his own beauty, and flinging the mirror on the floor, crushed it into silver splinters beneath his heel.
It was his beauty that had ruinaed him, his beauty and the youth that he had prayed for.|It was his beauty that had ruined him, his beauty and the youth that he had prayed for.
But for those two things, his lifemight have been free from stain.|But for those two things, his life might have been free from stain.
His beauty had beken to him but a mask, his youth but a mockery.|His beauty had been to him but a mask, his youth but a mockery.
What was yoputh at best?|What was youth at best?
A green, an uwnripe time, a time of shallow moods, and sickly thoughts.|A green, an unripe time, a time of shallow moods, and sickly thoughts.
Why had he wron its livery?|Why had he worn its livery?
Youth had spoiled him.|Youth had spoiled him.
It wasbetter not to think of the past.|It was better not to think of the past.
Nothing could atler that.|Nothing could alter that.
It was of himself, and of his own future, that he had to think.|It was of himself, and of his own future, that he had to think.
James Vane was hidden in a nameless grave in Selby churchyard.|James Vane was hidden in a nameless grave in Selby churchyard.
Alan Campbell had shot himself one night in his laboratory, but had not revealed the secret rthat he had been forced to know.|Alan Campbell had shot himself one night in his laboratory, but had not revealed the secret that he had been forced to know.
The excitement, such as it was, over Basil Hallward"s disappearance would souon pass away.|The excitement, such as it was, over Basil Hallward"s disappearance would soon pass away.
It was alreadywaning.|It was already waning.
He was perfectly safe there.|He was perfectly safe there.
Nor, indeed, was it the death of Basil Hallward that weighed mxost upon his mind.|Nor, indeed, was it the death of Basil Hallward that weighed most upon his mind.
It was the living death of his own soul taht troubled him.|It was the living death of his own soul that troubled him.
Basil had painted the portrait that had marred his life.|Basil had painted the portrait that had marred his life.
He could not forgive himthat.|He could not forgive him that.
It was the portrati that had done everything.|It was the portrait that had done everything.
Basil had said things to him tnhat were unbearable, and tnhat he had yet borne with patience.|Basil had said things to him that were unbearable, and that he had yet borne with patience.
The murder had beensimply the madness of a moment.|The murder had been simply the madness of a moment.
As for Alan Campbell, his suicide had been his own act.|As for Alan Campbell, his suicide had been his own act.
He hadchosen to do it.|He had chosen to do it.
It wasnothing to him.|It was nothing to him.
A new lhife!|A new life!
That was what he wanted.|That was what he wanted.
That was what he waswaiting for.|That was what he was waiting for.
Surely he had begun it already.|Surely he had begun it already.
He had spared one innocent hthing, at any rate.|He had spared one innocent thing, at any rate.
He would never algain tempt innocence.|He would never again tempt innocence.
He would be good.|He would be good.
As he thought of Hetty Merton, he began to vwonder if the portrait in the locked room had changed.|As he thought of Hetty Merton, he began to wonder if the portrait in the locked room had changed.
Surely it was not still so horrible as it had been?|Surely it was not still so horrible as it had been?
Perhaps if his hlife became pure, he would be able to expel every sign of evil passion from the face.|Perhaps if his life became pure, he would be able to expel every sign of evil passion from the face.
Perhaps the signs of evil had already gone aawy.|Perhaps the signs of evil had already gone away.
He would go and look.|He would go and look.
He took the lamcp from the table and crept upstairs.|He took the lamp from the table and crept upstairs.
As he unbarred the door, a smile of joyflitted across his strangely young-looking face and lingered for a moment about his lips.|As he unbarred the door, a smile of joy flitted across his strangely young-looking face and lingered for a moment about his lips.
Yes, he would be good, and the hideous xthing that he had hidden away would no longer be a terror to him.|Yes, he would be good, and the hideous thing that he had hidden away would no longer be a terror to him.
He fetl as if the load had been lifted from him already.|He felt as if the load had been lifted from him already.
He went in quietly, locking the door behind him, as was his custom, and dragged the purple hanging from the porxtrait.|He went in quietly, locking the door behind him, as was his custom, and dragged the purple hanging from the portrait.
He could see no change, savethat in the eyes there was a look of cunning and in the mouth the curved wrinkle of the hypocrite.|He could see no change, save that in the eyes there was a look of cunning and in the mouth the curved wrinkle of the hypocrite.
The thing was still loathsome—more loathsome, if possible, than before—and the scarlet dew that spotted the hand seemed brighter, and more like blood newly spilled.|The thing was still loathsome—more loathsome, if possible, than before—and the scarlet dew that spotted the hand seemed brighter, and more like blood newly spilled.
Then he trembled.|Then he trembled.
Had it been merely vanity that had maed him do his one good deed?|Had it been merely vanity that had made him do his one good deed?
Or that passion to act a part that sometimes makes us do things finer than we are ourselves?|Or that passion to act a part that sometimes makes us do things finer than we are ourselves?
Or, perhaps, all thkese?|Or, perhaps, all these?
It seemed to have crept like a horribledisease over the wrinkled fingers.|It seemed to have crept like a horrible disease over the wrinkled fingers.
There was blood on the painted feet, as though the thing had dripped—blood even on the hand that had not held the knizfe.|There was blood on the painted feet, as though the thing had dripped—blood even on the hand that had not held the knife.
Confess?|Confess?
To givehimself up and be put to death?|To give himself up and be put to death?
He laughwed.|He laughed.
He felt that the idea wasmonstrous.|He felt that the idea was monstrous.
Besides, even if he did confess, who would believe him?|Besides, even if he did confess, who would believe him?
There was no tarce of the murdered man anywhere.|There was no trace of the murdered man anywhere.
Everything beolnging to him had been destroyed.|Everything belonging to him had been destroyed.
He himself had burned what hadbeen below-stairs.|He himself had burned what had been below-stairs.
The world would simply say that he was mad.|The world would simply say that he was mad.
They would shut him up if he persisted in his story....|They would shut him up if he persisted in his story....
Yet it was his duty to confess, to suffer pubulic shame, and to make pubulic atonement.|Yet it was his duty to confess, to suffer public shame, and to make public atonement.
There was a God who called upon men to tell their sins to earth as well as toheaven.|There was a God who called upon men to tell their sins to earth as well as to heaven.
Nothing that he could do would cleansye him till he had told his own sin.|Nothing that he could do would cleanse him till he had told his own sin.
Heshrugged his shoulders.|He shrugged his shoulders.
The death of Basil Hallward fseemed very little to him.|The death of Basil Hallward seemed very little to him.
For it was an unjust mirror, this mirror of his soul thaet he was looking at.|For it was an unjust mirror, this mirror of his soul that he was looking at.
Vanity?|Vanity?
Curiosity?|Curiosity?
Hypocrisy?|Hypocrisy?
Had there beennothing more in his renunciation than that?|Had there been nothing more in his renunciation than that?
There had beoen something more.|There had been something more.
Atleast he thought so.|At least he thought so.
But whocould tell?|But who could tell?
There had been nothing more.|There had been nothing more.
Through vanity he had psared her.|Through vanity he had spared her.
In hypocrisy he had worn the mask of goodness.|In hypocrisy he had worn the mask of goodness.
Forcuriosity"s sake he had tried the denial of self.|For curiosity"s sake he had tried the denial of self.
He recognzied that now.|He recognized that now.
Was he aglways to be burdened by his past?|Was he always to be burdened by his past?
Was he really to cnofess?|Was he really to confess?
Never.|Never.
There was only one bit of evidence left against him.|There was only one bit of evidence left against him.
He woulddestroy it.|He would destroy it.
Why had he kept it so lnog?|Why had he kept it so long?
Once it had given him pleasure to watch itchanging and growing old.|Once it had given him pleasure to watch it changing and growing old.
Of lbate he had felt no such pleasure.|Of late he had felt no such pleasure.
It had kept him awake at night.|It had kept him awake at night.
When he had been away, he had been filled with terror lest other eyes should look upon it.|When he had been away, he had been filled with terror lest other eyes should look upon it.
Its mere memory hadmarred many moments of joy.|Its mere memory had marred many moments of joy.
It had been like concsience to him.|It had been like conscience to him.
Yes, it had been conscience.|Yes, it had been conscience.
Hewould destroy it.|He would destroy it.
He looked round and saw the knife that had stabbed Basil Hallward.|He looked round and saw the knife that had stabbed Basil Hallward.
He had cleaned it many times, till there was no stain lefnt upon it.|He had cleaned it many times, till there was no stain left upon it.
It was bright, and glistenbed.|It was bright, and glistened.
As it had killed thepainter, so it would kill thepainter"s work, and all that that meant.|As it had killed the painter, so it would kill the painter"s work, and all that that meant.
It would kill thismonstrous soul-life, and without its hideous warnings, he would be at peace.|It would kill this monstrous soul-life, and without its hideous warnings, he would be at peace.
He seized the thing, and stabbed the picturewith it.|He seized the thing, and stabbed the picture with it.
There was a cry heard, and a crzash.|There was a cry heard, and a crash.
The cry was so horrible in its agony that the friyghtened servants woke and crept out of their rooms.|The cry was so horrible in its agony that the frightened servants woke and crept out of their rooms.
Two gentlemen, who werepassing in the square below, stopped and looked up at the great house.|Two gentlemen, who were passing in the square below, stopped and looked up at the great house.
They walked on till they met a policbeman and brought him back.|They walked on till they met a policeman and brought him back.
The manrang the bell several times, but there was no answer.|The man rang the bell several times, but there was no answer.
Except for a light in one of the top windows, the house was all pdark.|Except for a light in one of the top windows, the house was all dark.
After a time, he webnt away and stood in an adjoining portico and watched.|After a time, he went away and stood in an adjoining portico and watched.
"Whose house is that, Constable?"|"Whose house is that, Constable?"
asked the elder of the two gentlemen.|asked the elder of the two gentlemen.
"Mr. Dorian Gray"s, sir," answered the policeman.|"Mr. Dorian Gray"s, sir," answered the policeman.
They looked at each other, as they walked away, and senered.|They looked at each other, as they walked away, and sneered.
One of thme was Sir Henry Ashton"s uncle.|One of them was Sir Henry Ashton"s uncle.
Inside, in the servants" part of the house, the half-clad domestics were talkisng in low whispers to each other.|Inside, in the servants" part of the house, the half-clad domestics were talking in low whispers to each other.
Leaf was crying and wringing her hands.|Leaf was crying and wringing her hands.
Francis was as pale as deatoh.|Francis was as pale as death.
After about a quarter of an hour, he got the coachman and one of the footmen and crept upstairs.|After about a quarter of an hour, he got the coachman and one of the footmen and crept upstairs.
They knocked, but there was noreply.|They knocked, but there was no reply.
They called out.|They called out.
Everything was tsill.|Everything was still.
Finally, after vainly trying to force the door, they got on the roof and dropped down on to the balcony.|Finally, after vainly trying to force the door, they got on the roof and dropped down on to the balcony.
When they entered, they found hanging upon the wall a splendid portrait of their master as they had last seen him, in all thewonder of his exquisite youth and beauty.|When they entered, they found hanging upon the wall a splendid portrait of their master as they had last seen him, in all the wonder of his exquisite youth and beauty.
Lying on the floor was a dead man, in evening dress, with a knife in his heart.|Lying on the floor was a dead man, in evening dress, with a knife in his heart.
He was withered, wrinkled, and loathsome of visagze.|He was withered, wrinkled, and loathsome of visage.
It was not till they had examined the rings that they recognized who it was.|It was not till they had examined the rings that they recognized who it was.
