THE Mole had been working very hard all the morning, spring-cleaning his little home.
First with brooms, then with dusters; then on ladders and steps and chairs, with a
brush and a pail of whitewash; till he had dust in his throat and eyes, and splashes of
whitewash all over his black fur, and an aching back and weary arms. Spring was
moving in the air above and in the earth below and around him, penetrating even his
dark and lowly little house with its spirit of divine discontent and longing. It was small
wonder, then, that he suddenly flung down his brush on the floor, said ‘Bother!’ and ‘O
blow!’ and also ‘Hang springcleaning!’ and bolted out of the house without even
waiting to put on his coat.
Something up above was calling him imperiously, and he made for the steep little
tunnel which answered in his case to the gravelled carriage-drive owned by animals
whose residences are nearer to the sun and air. So he scraped and scratched and
scrabbled and scrooged and then he scrooged again and scrabbled and scratched and
scraped, working busily with his little paws and muttering to himself, ‘Up we go! Up
we go!’ till at last, pop! his snout came out into the sunlight, and he found himself
rolling in the warm grass of a great meadow.
‘This is fine!’ he said to himself. ‘This is better than whitewashing!’ The sunshine struck
hot on his fur, soft breezes caressed his heated brow, and after the seclusion of the
cellarage he had lived in so long the carol of happy birds fell on his dulled hearing
almost like a shout. Jumping off all his four legs at once, in the joy of living and the
delight of spring without its cleaning, he pursued his way across the meadow till he
reached the hedge on the further side.
‘Hold up!’ said an elderly rabbit at the gap. ‘Sixpence for the privilege of passing by the
private road!’ He was bowled over in an instant by the impatient and contemptuous
Mole, who trotted along the side of the hedge chaffing the other rabbits as they peeped
hurriedly from their holes to see what the row was about.
‘Onion-sauce! Onion-sauce!’ he remarked jeeringly, and was gone before they could
think of a thoroughly satisfactory reply. Then they all started grumbling at each other.
‘How stupid you are! Why didn’t you tell him-’ ‘Well, why didn’t you say-’ ‘You might
have reminded him-’ and so on, in the usual way; but, of course, it was then much too
late, as is always the case.
It all seemed too good to be true. Hither and thither through the meadows he rambled
busily, along the hedgerows, across the copses, finding everywhere birds building,
flowers budding, leaves thrusting- everything happy, and progressive, and occupied.
And instead of having an uneasy conscience pricking him and whispering ‘whitewash!’
he somehow could only feel how jolly it was to be the only idle dog among all these
busy citizens. After all, the best part of a holiday is perhaps not so much to be resting
yourself, as to see all the other fellows busy working.
He thought his happiness was complete when, as he meandered aimlessly along,
suddenly he stood by the edge of a full-fed river. Never in his life had he seen a river
before- this sleek, sinuous, full-bodied animal, chasing and chuckling, gripping things
with a gurgle and leaving them with a laugh, to fling itself on fresh playmates that
shook themselves free, and were caught and held again.
All was a-shake and a-shiver- glints and gleams and sparkles, rustle and swirl, chatter
and bubble. The Mole was bewitched, entranced, fascinated. By the side of the river he
trotted as one trots, when very small, by the side of a man who holds one spell-bound
by exciting stories; and when tired at last, he sat on the bank, while the river still
chattered on to him, a babbling procession of the best stories in the world, sent from the
heart of the earth to be told at last to the insatiable sea.
As he sat on the grass and looked across the river, a dark hole in the bank opposite, just
above the water’s edge, caught his eye, and dreamily he fell to considering what a nice
snug dwelling-place it would make for an animal with few wants and fond of a bijou
riverside residence, above flood level and remote from noise and dust. As he gazed,
something bright and small seemed to twinkle down in the heart of it, vanished, then
twinkled once more like a tiny star. But it could hardly be a star in such an unlikely
situation; and it was too glittering and small for a glow-worm. Then, as he looked, it
winked at him, and so declared itself to be an eye; and a small face began gradually to
grow up round it, like a frame round a picture.
A brown little face, with whiskers.
A grave round face, with the same twinkle in its eye that had first attracted his notice.
Small neat ears and thick silky hair.
It was the Water Rat!
Then the two animals stood and regarded each other cautiously.
‘Hullo, Mole!’ said the Water Rat.
‘Hullo, Rat!’ said the Mole.
‘Would you like to come over?’ enquired the Rat presently.
‘Oh, its all very well to talk,’ said the Mole, rather pettishly, he being new to a river and
riverside life and its ways.
The Rat said nothing, but stooped and unfastened a rope and hauled on it; then lightly
stepped into a little boat which the Mole had not observed. It was painted blue outside
and white within, and was just the size for two animals; and the Mole’s whole heart
went out to it at once, even though he did not yet fully understand its uses.
The Rat sculled smartly across and made fast. Then he held up his forepaw as the Mole
stepped gingerly down. ‘Lean on that!’ he said. ‘Now then, step lively!’
and the Mole to his surprise and rapture found himself actually seated in the stern of a
real boat.
‘This has been a wonderful day!’ said he, as the Rat shoved off and took to the sculls
again. ‘Do you know, I’ve never been in a boat before in all my life.’ ‘What?’ cried the
Rat, open-mouthed: ‘Never been in a- you never- well Iwhat have you been doing,
then?’ ‘Is it so nice as all that?’ asked the Mole shyly, though he was quite prepared to
believe it as he leant back in his seat and surveyed the cushions, the oars, the rowlocks,
and all the fascinating fittings, and felt the boat sway lightly under him.
‘Nice? It’s the only thing,’ said the Water Rat solemnly, as he leant forward for his
stroke. ‘Believe me, my young friend, there is nothing- absolute nothinghalf so much
worth doing as simply messing about in boats. Simply messing,’ he went on dreamily:
‘messing- about- in- boats; messing-’ ‘Look ahead, Rat!’ cried the Mole suddenly.
It was too late. The boat struck the bank full tilt. The dreamer, the joyous oarsman, lay
on his back at the bottom of the boat, his heels in the air.
‘-about in boats- or with boats,’ the Rat went on composedly, picking himself up with a
pleasant laugh. ‘In or out of ‘em, it doesn’t matter. Nothing seems really to matter,
that’s the charm of it. Whether you get away, or whether you don’t; whether you arrive
at your destination or whether you reach somewhere else, or whether you never get
anywhere at all, you’re always busy, and you never do anything in particular; and
when you’ve done it there’s always something else to do, and you can do it if you like,
but you’d much better not. Look here! If you’ve really nothing else on hand this
morning, supposing we drop down the river together, and have a long day of it?’ The
Mole waggled his toes from sheer happiness, spread his chest with a sigh of full
contentment, and leaned back blissfully into the soft cushions. ‘What a day I’m having!’
he said. ‘Let us start at once!’ ‘Hold hard a minute, then!’ said the Rat. He looped the
painter through a ring in his landing-stage, climbed up into his hole above, and after a
short interval reappeared staggering under a fat, wicker luncheon-basket.
‘Shove that under your feet,’ he observed to the Mole, as he passed it down into the
boat. Then he untied the painter and took the sculls again.
‘What’s inside it?’ asked the Mole, wriggling with curiosity.
‘There’s cold chicken inside it,’ replied the Rat briefly;
‘coldtonguecoldhamcoldbeefpickledgherkinssaladfrenchrolls
resssandwichespottedmeatgingerbeerlemonadesodawater-’ ‘O stop, stop,’ cried the
Mole in ecstacies: ‘This is too much!’ ‘Do you really think so?’ enquired the Rat
seriously. ‘It’s only what I always take on these little excursions; and the other animals
are always telling me that I’m a mean beast and cut it very fine!’
The Mole never heard a word he was saying. Absorbed in the new life he was entering
upon, intoxicated with the sparkle, the ripple, the scents and the sounds and the
sunlight, he trailed a paw in the water and dreamed long waking dreams.
The Water Rat, like the good little fellow he was, sculled steadily on and forebore to
disturb him.
‘I like your clothes awfully, old chap,’ he remarked after some half an hour or so had
passed. ‘I’m going to get a black velvet smoking-suit myself some day, as soon as I can
afford it.’ ‘I beg your pardon,’ said the Mole, pulling himself together with an effort.
‘You must think me very rude; but all this is so new to me. So- this- is- a- River!’ ‘The
River,’ corrected the Rat.
‘And you really live by the river? What a jolly life!’ ‘By it and with it and on it and in
it,’ said the Rat. ‘It’s brother and sister to me, and aunts, and company, and food and
drink, and (naturally) washing. It’s my world, and I don’t want any other. What it
hasn’t got is not worth having, and what it doesn’t know is not worth knowing. Lord!
the times we’ve had together! Whether in winter or summer, spring or autumn, it’s
always got its fun and its excitements. When the floods are on in February, and my
cellars and basement are brimming with drink that’s no good to me, and the brown
water runs by my best bedroom window; or again when it all drops away and shows
patches of mud that smells like plum-cake, and the rushes and weed clog the channels,
and I can potter about dry shod over most of the bed of it and find fresh food to eat,
and things careless people have dropped out of boats!’ ‘But isn’t it a bit dull at times?’
the Mole ventured to ask. ‘Just you and the river, and no one else to pass a word with?’
‘No one else to- well, I mustn’t be hard on you,’ said the Rat with forbearance. ‘You’re
new to it, and of course you don’t know. The bank is so crowded nowadays that many
people are moving away altogether: O no, it isn’t what it used to be, at all. Otters,
kingfishers, dabchicks, moorhens, all of them about all day long and always wanting
you to do something- as if a fellow had no business of his own to attend to!’ ‘What lies
over there?’ asked the Mole, waving a paw towards a background of woodland that
darkly framed the water-meadows on one side of the river.
‘That? O, that’s just the Wild Wood,’ said the Rat shortly. ‘We don’t go there very
much, we river-bankers.’ ‘Aren’t they- aren’t they very nice people in there?’ said the
Mole, a trifle nervously.
‘W-e-ll,’ replied the Rat, ‘let me see. The squirrels are all right. And the rabbits- some of
‘em, but rabbits are a mixed lot. And then there’s Badger, of course.
He lives right in the heart of it; wouldn’t live anywhere else, either, if you paid him to
do it. Dear old Badger! Nobody interferes with him. They’d better not,’ he added
significantly.
‘Why, who should interfere with him?’ asked the Mole.
‘Well, of course- there- are others,’ explained the Rat in a hesitating sort of way.
‘Weasels- and stoats- and foxes- and so on. They’re all right in a way- I’m very good
friends with them- pass the time of day when we meet, and all that- but they break out
sometimes, there’s no denying it, and then- well, you can’t really trust them, and that’s
the fact.’ The Mole knew well that it is quite against animal-etiquette to dwell on
possible trouble ahead, or even to allude to it; so he dropped the subject.
‘And beyond the Wild Wood again?’ he asked: ‘Where it’s all blue and dim, and one
sees what may be hills or perhaps they mayn’t, and something like the smoke of towns,
or is it only cloud-drift? ‘Beyond the Wild Wood comes the Wide World,’ said the Rat.
‘And that’s something that doesn’t matter, either to you or me. I’ve never been there,
and I’m never going, nor you either, if you’ve got any sense at all. Don’t ever refer to it
again, please. Now then! Here’s our backwater at last, where we’re going to lunch.’
Leaving the main stream, they now passed into what seemed at first sight like a little
landlocked lake. Green turf sloped down to either edge, brown snaky treeroots
gleamed below the surface of the quiet water, while ahead of them the silvery shoulder
and foamy tumble of a weir, arm-in-arm with a restless dripping mill-wheel, that held
up in its turn a grey-gabled mill-house, filled the air with a soothing murmur of sound,
dull and smothery, yet with little clear voices speaking up cheerfully out of it at
intervals. It was so very beautiful that the Mole could only hold up both forepaws and
gasp, ‘O my! O my! O my!’ The Rat brought the boat alongside the bank, made her fast,
helped the still awkward Mole safely ashore, and swung out the luncheon-basket. The
Mole begged as a favour to be allowed to unpack it all by himself; and the Rat was very
pleased to indulge him, and to sprawl at full length on the grass and rest, while his
excited friend shook out the table-cloth and spread it, took out all the mysterious
packets one by one and arranged their contents in due order, still gasping, ‘O my! O
my!’ at each fresh revelation. When all was ready, the Rat said, ‘Now, pitch in, old
fellow!’ and the Mole was indeed very glad to obey, for he had started his springcleaning at a very early hour that morning, as people will do, and had not paused for
bite or sup; and he had been through a very great deal since that distant time which
now seemed so many days ago.
‘What are you looking at?’ said the Rat presently, when the edge of their hunger was
somewhat dulled, and the Mole’s eyes were able to wander off the tablecloth a little.
‘I am looking,’ said the Mole, ‘at a streak of bubbles that I see travelling along the
surface of the water. That is a thing that strikes me as funny.’ ‘Bubbles? Oho!’ said the
Rat, and chirruped cheerily in an inviting sort of way.
A broad glistening muzzle showed itself above the edge of the bank, and the Otter
hauled himself out and shook the water from his coat.
‘Greedy beggars!’ he observed, making for the provender. ‘Why didn’t you invite me,
Ratty?’ ‘This was an impromptu affair,’ explained the Rat. ‘By the way- my friend Mr.
Mole.’ ‘Proud, I’m sure,’ said the Otter, and the two animals were friends forthwith.
‘Such a rumpus everywhere!’ continued the Otter. ‘All the world seems out on the river
to-day. I came up this backwater to try and get a moment’s peace, and then stumble
upon you fellows!- At least- I beg pardon- I don’t exactly mean that, you know.’ There
was a rustle behind them, proceeding from a hedge wherein last year’s leaves still
clung thick, and a stripy head, with high shoulders behind it, peered forth on them.
‘Come on, old Badger!’ shouted the Rat.
The Badger trotted forward a pace or two; then grunted, ‘H’m! Company,’ and turned
his back and disappeared from view.
‘That’s just the sort of fellow he is!’ observed the disappointed Rat. ‘Simply hates
Society! Now we shan’t see any more of him to-day. Well, tell us, who’s out on the
river?’
‘Toad’s out, for one,’ replied the Otter. ‘In his brand-new wager-boat; new togs, new
everything!’ The two animals looked at each other and laughed.
‘Once, it was nothing but sailing,’ said the Rat. ‘Then he tired of that and took to
punting. Nothing would please him but to punt all day and every day, and a nice mess
he made of it. Last year it was house-boating, and we all had to go and stay with him in
his house-boat, and pretend we liked it. He was going to spend the rest of his life in a
house-boat. It’s all the same, whatever he takes up; he gets tired of it, and starts on
something fresh.’ ‘Such a good fellow, too,’ remarked the Otter reflectively: ‘But no
stabilityespecially in a boat!’ From where they sat they could get a glimpse of the main
stream across the island that separated them; and just then a wager-boat flashed into
view, the rowera short, stout figure- splashing badly and rolling a good deal, but
working his hardest. The Rat stood up and hailed him, but Toad- for it was he- shook
his head and settled sternly to his work.
‘He’ll be out of the boat in a minute if he rolls like that,’ said the Rat, sitting down
again.
‘Of course he will,’ chuckled the Otter. ‘Did I ever tell you that good story about Toad
and the lock-keeper? It happened this way. Toad....’
An errant May-fly swerved unsteadily athwart the current in the intoxicated fashion
affected by young bloods of May-flies seeing life. A swirl of water and a ‘cloop!’ and
the May-fly was visible no more.
Neither was the Otter.
The Mole looked down. The voice was still in his ears, but the turf whereon he had
sprawled was clearly vacant. Not an Otter to be seen, as far as the distant horizon.
But again there was a streak of bubbles on the surface of the river.
The Rat hummed a tune, and the Mole recollected that animal-etiquette forbade any
sort of comment on the sudden disappearance of one’s friends at any moment, for any
reason or no reason whatever.
‘Well, well,’ said the Rat, ‘I suppose we ought to be moving. I wonder which of us had
better pack the luncheon-basket?’ He did not speak as if he was frightfully eager for the
treat.
‘O, please let me,’ said the Mole. So, of course, the Rat let him.
Packing the basket was not quite such pleasant work as unpacking the basket.
It never is. But the Mole was bent on enjoying everything, and although just when he
had got the basket packed and strapped up tightly he saw a plate staring up at him
from the grass, and when the job had been done again the Rat pointed out a fork which
anybody ought to have seen, and last of all, behold! the mustard pot, which he had
been sitting on without knowing it- still, somehow, the thing got finished at last,
without much loss of temper.
The afternoon sun was getting low as the Rat sculled gently homewards in a dreamy
mood, murmuring poetry-things over to himself, and not paying much attention to
Mole. But the Mole was very full of lunch, and self-satisfaction, and pride, and already
quite at home in a boat (so he thought) and was getting a bit restless besides: and
presently he said, ‘Ratty! Please, I want to row, now!’ The Rat shook his head with a
smile. ‘Not yet, my young friend,’ he said‘wait till you’ve had a few lessons. It’s not so
easy as it looks.’ The Mole was quiet for a minute or two. But he began to feel more and
more jealous of Rat, sculling so strongly and so easily along, and his pride began to
whisper that he could do it every bit as well. He jumped up and seized the sculls, so
suddenly, that the Rat, who was gazing out over the water and saying more poetrythings to himself, was taken by surprise and fell backwards off his seat with his legs in
the air for the second time, while the triumphant Mole took his place and grabbed the
sculls with entire confidence.
‘Stop it, you silly ass!’ cried the Rat, from the bottom of the boat. ‘You can’t do it! You’ll
have us over!’ The Mole flung his sculls back with a flourish, and made a great dig at
the water. He missed the surface altogether, his legs flew up above his head, and he
found himself lying on the top of the prostrate Rat. Greatly alarmed, he made a grab at
the side of the boat, and the next moment- Sploosh!
Over went the boat, and he found himself struggling in the river.
O my, how cold the water was, and O, how very wet it felt. How it sang in his ears as
he went down, down, down! How bright and welcome the sun looked as he rose to the
surface coughing and spluttering! How black was his despair when he felt himself
sinking again! Then a firm paw gripped him by the back of his neck. It was the Rat, and
he was evidently laughing- the Mole could feel him laughing, right down his arm and
through his paw, and so into his- the Mole’sneck.
The Rat got hold of a scull and shoved it under the Mole’s arm; then he did the same by
the other side of him and, swimming behind, propelled the helpless animal to shore,
hauled him out, and set him down on the bank, a squashy, pulpy lump of misery.
When the Rat had rubbed him down a bit, and wrung some of the wet out of him, he
said, ‘Now, then, old fellow! Trot up and down the towing-path as hard as you can, till
you’re warm and dry again, while I dive for the luncheon-basket.’ So the dismal Mole,
wet without and ashamed within, trotted about till he was fairly dry, while the Rat
plunged into the water again, recovered the boat, righted her and made her fast,
fetched his floating property to shore by degrees, and finally dived successfully for the
luncheon-basket and struggled to land with it.
When all was ready for a start once more, the Mole, limp and dejected, took his seat in
the stern of the boat; and as they set off, he said in a low voice, broken with emotion,
‘Ratty, my generous friend! I am very sorry indeed for my foolish and ungrateful
conduct. My heart quite fails me when I think how I might have lost that beautiful
luncheon-basket. Indeed, I have been a complete ass, and I know it. Will you overlook
it this once and forgive me, and let things go on as before?’ ‘That’s all right, bless you!’
responded the Rat cheerily. ‘What’s a little wet to a Water Rat? I’m more in the water
than out of it most days. Don’t you think any more about it; and, look here! I really
think you had better come and stop with me for a little time. It’s very plain and rough,
you know- not like Toad’s house at all but you haven’t seen that yet; still, I can make
you comfortable. And I’ll teach you to row, and to swim, and you’ll soon be as handy
on the water as any of us.’ The Mole was so touched by his kind manner of speaking
that he could find no voice to answer him; and he had to brush away a tear or two with
the back of his paw. But the Rat kindly looked in another direction, and presently the
Mole’s spirits revived again, and he was even able to give some straight back-talk to a
couple of moorhens who were sniggering to each other about his bedraggled
appearance.
When they got home, the Rat made a bright fire in the parlour, and planted the Mole in
an arm-chair in front of it, having, fetched down a dressing-gown and slippers for him,
and told him river stories till supper-time. Very thrilling stories they were, too, to an
earth-dwelling animal like Mole. Stories about weirs, and sudden floods, and leaping
pike, and steamers that flung hard bottles- at least bottles were certainly flung, and
from steamers, so presumably by them; and about herons, and how particular they
were whom they spoke to; and about adventures down drains, and night-fishings with
Otter, or excursions far a-field with Badger.
Supper was a most cheerful meal; but very shortly afterwards a terribly sleepy Mole
had to be escorted upstairs by his considerate host, to the best bedroom, where he soon
laid his head on his pillow in great peace and contentment, knowing that his newfound friend the River was lapping the sill of his window.
This day was only the first of many similar ones for the emancipated Mole, each of
them longer and full of interest as the ripening summer moved onward.
He learnt to swim and to row, and entered into the joy of running water; and with his
ear to the reed-stems he caught, at intervals, something of what the wind went
whispering so constantly among them.
‘RATTY,’ said the Mole suddenly, one bright summer morning, ‘if you please, I want to
ask you a favour.’ The Rat was sitting on the river bank, singing a little song. He had
just composed it himself, so he was very taken up with it, and would not pay proper
attention to Mole or anything else. Since early morning he had been swimming in the
river, in company with his friends the ducks. And when the ducks stood on their heads
suddenly, as ducks will, he would dive down and tickle their necks, just under where
their chins would be if ducks had chins, till they were forced to come to the surface
again in a hurry, spluttering and angry and shaking their feathers at him, for it is
impossible to say quite all you feel when your head is under water.
At last they implored him to go away and attend to his own affairs and leave them to
mind theirs. So the Rat went away, and sat on the river bank in the sun, and made up a
song about them, which he called ‘DUCKS’ DITTY.’
All along the backwater, Through the rushes tall, Ducks are a-dabbling, Up tails all!
Ducks’ tails, drakes’ tails, Yellow feet a-quiver, Yellow bills all out of sight Busy in the
river!
Slushy green undergrowth Where the roach swimHere we keep our larder, Cool and
full and dim.
Everyone for what he likes! We like to be Heads down, tails up, Dabbling free!
High in the blue above Swifts whirl and call.
We are down a-dabbling Up tails all! ‘I don’t know that I think so very much of that
little song, Rat,’ observed the Mole cautiously. He was no poet himself and didn’t care
who knew it; and he had a candid nature.
‘Nor don’t the ducks neither,’ replied the Rat cheerfully. ‘They say, “Why can’t fellows
be allowed to do what they like when they like and as they like, instead of other
fellows sitting on banks and watching them all the time and making remarks and
poetry and things about them? What nonsense it all is!” That’s what the ducks say.’ ‘So
it is, so it is,’ said the Mole, with great heartiness.
‘No, it isn’t!’ cried the Rat indignantly.
‘Well then, it isn’t, it isn’t,’ replied the Mole soothingly. ‘But what I wanted to ask you
was, won’t you take me to call on Mr. Toad? I’ve heard so much about him, and I do so
want to make his acquaintance.’ ‘Why, certainly,’ said the good-natured Rat, jumping
to his feet and dismissing poetry from his mind for the day. ‘Get the boat out, and we’ll
paddle up there at once. It’s never the wrong time to call on Toad. Early or late he’s
always the same fellow. Always good-tempered, always glad to see you, always sorry
when you go!’ ‘He must be a very nice animal,’ observed the Mole, as he got into the
boat and took the sculls, while the Rat settled himself comfortably in the stern.
‘He is indeed the best of animals,’ replied Rat. ‘So simple, so good-natured, and so
affectionate. Perhaps he’s not very clever- we can’t all be geniuses; and it may be that
he is both boastful and conceited. But he has got some great qualities, has Toady.’
Rounding a bend in the river, they came in sight of a handsome, dignified old house of
mellowed red brick, with well-kept lawns reaching down to the water’s edge.
‘There’s Toad Hall,’ said the Rat; ‘and that creek on the left, where the noticeboard
says, “Private. No landing allowed,” leads to his boat-house, where we’ll leave the
boat. The stables are over there to the right. That’s the banqueting-hall you’re looking at
now- very old, that is. Toad is rather rich, you know, and this is really one of the nicest
houses in these parts, though we never admit as much to Toad.’ They glided up the
creek, and the Mole shipped his sculls as they passed into the shadow of a large boathouse. Here they saw many handsome boats, slung from the crossbeams or hauled up
on a slip, but none in the water; and the place had an unused and a deserted air.
The Rat looked around him. ‘I understand,’ said he. ‘Boating is played out.
He’s tired of it, and done with it. I wonder what new fad he has taken up now? Come
along and let’s look him up. We shall hear all about it quite soon enough.’ They
disembarked, and strolled across the gay flower-decked lawns in search of Toad,
whom they presently happened upon resting in a wicker garden-chair, with a preoccupied expression of face, and a large map spread out on his knees.
‘Hooray!’ he cried, jumping up on seeing them, ‘this is splendid!’ He shook the paws of
both of them warmly, never waiting for an introduction to the Mole.
‘How kind of you!’ he went on, dancing round them. ‘I was just going to send a boat
down the river for you, Ratty, with strict orders that you were to be fetched up here at
once, whatever you were doing. I want you badly- both of you. Now what will you
take? Come inside and have something! You don’t know how lucky it is, your turning
up just now!’ ‘Let’s sit quiet a bit, Toady!’ said the Rat, throwing himself into an easy
chair, while the Mole took another by the side of him and made some civil remark
about Toad’s ‘delightful residence.’ ‘Finest house on the whole river,’ cried Toad
boisterously. ‘Or anywhere else, for that matter,’ he could not help adding.
Here the Rat nudged the Mole. Unfortunately the Toad saw him do it, and turned very
red. There was a moment’s painful silence. Then Toad burst out laughing. ‘All right,
Ratty,’ he said. ‘It’s only my way, you know. And it’s not such a very bad house, is it?
You know you rather like it yourself. Now, look here. Let’s be sensible. You are the
very animals I wanted. You’ve got to help me. It’s most important!’ ‘It’s about your
rowing, I suppose,’ said the Rat, with an innocent air. ‘You’re getting on fairly well,
though you splash a good bit still. With a great deal of patience, and any quantity of
coaching, you may-’ ‘O, pooh! boating!’ interrupted the Toad, in great disgust. Silly
boyish amusement. I’ve given that up long ago. Sheer waste of time, that’s what it is. It
makes me downright sorry to see you fellows, who ought to know better, spending all
your energies in that aimless manner. No, I’ve discovered the real thing, the only
genuine occupation for a lifetime. I propose to devote the remainder of mine to it, and
can only regret the wasted years that lie behind me, squandered in trivialities.
Come with me, dear Ratty, and your amiable friend also, if he will be so very good, just
as far as the stable-yard, and you shall see what you shall see!’ He led the way to the
stable-yard accordingly, the Rat following with a most mistrustful expression; and
there, drawn out of the coach-house into the open, they saw a gipsy caravan, shining
with newness, painted a canary-yellow picked out with green, and red wheels.
‘There you are!’ cried the Toad, straddling and expanding himself. ‘There’s real life for
you, embodied in that little cart. The open road, the dusty highway, the heath, the
common, the hedgerows, the rolling downs! Camps, villages, towns, cities! Here today, up and off to somewhere else to-morrow! Travel, change, interest, excitement! The
whole world before you, and a horizon that’s always changing! And mind! this is the
very finest cart of its sort that was ever built, without any exception. Come inside and
look at the arrangements. Planned ‘em all myself, I did!’ The Mole was tremendously
interested and excited, and followed him eagerly up the steps and into the interior of
the caravan. The Rat only snorted and thrust his hands deep into his pockets,
remaining where he was.
It was indeed very compact and comfortable. Little sleeping bunks- a little table that
folded up against the wall- a cooking-stove, lockers, bookshelves, a birdcage with a
bird in it; and pots, pans, jugs and kettles of every size and variety.
‘All complete!’ said the Toad triumphantly, pulling open a locker. ‘You see biscuits,
potted lobster, sardines- everything you can possibly want. Soda-water here- baccy
there- letter-paper, bacon, jam, cards and dominoes- you’ll find,’ he continued, as they
descended the steps again, ‘you’ll find that nothing whatever has been forgotten, when
we make our start this afternoon.’ ‘I beg your pardon,’ said the Rat slowly, as he
chewed a straw, ‘but did I overhear you say something about “we,” and “start,” and
“this afternoon?”’ ‘Now, you dear good old Ratty,’ said Toad, imploringly, ‘don’t begin
talking in that stiff and sniffy sort of way, because you know you’ve got to come. I can’t
possibly manage without you, so please consider it settled, and don’t argue- it’s the one
thing I can’t stand. You surely don’t mean to stick to your dull fusty old river all your
life, and just live in a hole in a bank, and boat? I want to show you the world! I’m going
to make an animal of you, my boy!’ ‘I don’t care,’ said the Rat, doggedly. ‘I’m not
coming, and that’s flat. And I am going to stick to my old river, and live in a hole, and
boat, as I’ve always done. And what’s more, Mole’s going to stick to me and do as I do,
aren’t you, Mole?’ ‘Of course I am,’ said the Mole, loyally. ‘I’ll always stick to you, Rat,
and what you say is to be- has got to be. All the same, it sounds as if it might have
been- well, rather fun, you know! he added, wistfully. Poor Mole! The Life
Adventurous was so new a thing to him, and so thrilling; and this fresh aspect of it was
so tempting; and he had fallen in love at first sight with the canary-coloured cart and
all its little fitments.
The Rat saw what was passing in his mind, and wavered. He hated disappointing
people, and he was fond of the Mole, and would do almost anything to oblige him.
Toad was watching both of them closely.
‘Come along in, and have some lunch,’ he said, diplomatically, ‘and we’ll talk it over.
We needn’t decide anything in a hurry. Of course, I don’t really care. I only want to
give pleasure to you fellows. “Live for others!” That’s my motto in life.’ During
luncheon- which was excellent, of course, as everything at Toad Hall always was- the
Toad simply let himself go. Disregarding the Rat, he proceeded to play upon the
inexperienced Mole as on a harp. Naturally a voluble animal, and always mastered by
his imagination, he painted the prospects of the trip and the joys of the open life and
the roadside in such glowing colours that the Mole could hardly sit in his chair for
excitement. Somehow, it soon seemed taken for granted by all three of them that the
trip was a settled thing; and the Rat, though still unconvinced in his mind, allowed his
good-nature to over-ride his personal objections. He could not bear to disappoint his
two friends, who were already deep in schemes and anticipations, planning out each
day’s separate occupation for several weeks ahead.
When they were quite ready, the now triumphant Toad led his companions to the
paddock and set them to capture the old grey horse, who, without having been
consulted, and to his own extreme annoyance, had been told off by Toad for the
dustiest job in this dusty expedition. He frankly preferred the paddock, and took a deal
of catching. Meantime Toad packed the lockers still tighter with necessaries, and hung
nosebags, nets of onions, bundles of hay, and baskets from the bottom of the cart. At
last the horse was caught and harnessed, and they set off, all talking at once, each
animal either trudging by the side of the cart or sitting on the shaft, as the humour took
him. It was a golden afternoon. The smell of the dust they kicked up was rich and
satisfying; out of thick orchards on either side the road, birds called and whistled to
them cheerily; good-natured wayfarers, passing them, gave them ‘Good-day,’ or
stopped to say nice things about their beautiful cart; and rabbits, sitting at their front
doors in the hedgerows, held up their forepaws, and said, ‘O my! O my! O my!’ Late in
the evening, tired and happy and miles from home, they drew up on a remote common
far from habitations, turned the horse loose to graze, and ate their simple supper sitting
on the grass by the side of the cart. Toad talked big about all he was going to do in the
days to come, while stars grew fuller and larger all around them, and a yellow moon,
appearing suddenly and silently from nowhere in particular, came to keep them
company and listen to their talk. At last they turned in to their little bunks in the cart;
and Toad, kicking out his legs, sleepily said, ‘Well, good night, you fellows! This is the
real life for a gentleman! Talk about your old river!’ ‘I don’t talk about my river,’
replied the patient Rat. ‘You know I don’t, Toad.
But I think about it,’ he added pathetically, in a lower tone: ‘I think about it- all the
time!’ The Mole reached out from under his blanket, felt for the Rat’s paw in the
darkness, and gave it a squeeze. ‘I’ll do whatever you like, Ratty,’ he whispered. ‘Shall
we run away to-morrow morning, quite early- very early- and go back to our dear old
hole on the river?’ ‘No, no, we’ll see it out,’ whispered back the Rat. ‘Thanks awfully,
but I ought to stick by Toad till this trip is ended. It wouldn’t be safe for him to be left
to himself. It won’t take very long. His fads never do. Good night!’ The end was indeed
nearer than even the Rat suspected.
After so much open air and excitement the Toad slept very soundly, and no amount of
shaking could rouse him out of bed next morning. So the Mole and Rat turned to,
quietly and manfully, and while the Rat saw to the horse, and lit a fire, and cleaned last
night’s cups and platters, and got things ready for breakfast, the Mole trudged off to
the nearest village, a long way off, for milk and eggs and various necessaries the Toad
had, of course, forgotten to provide. The hard work had all been done, and the two
animals were resting, thoroughly exhausted, by the time Toad appeared on the scene,
fresh and gay, remarking what a pleasant easy life it was they were all leading now,
after the cares and worries and fatigues of housekeeping at home.
They had a pleasant ramble that day over grassy downs and along narrow by lanes, and
camped as before, on a common, only this time the two guests took care that Toad
should do his fair share of work. In consequence, when the time came for starting next
morning, Toad was by no means so rapturous about the simplicity of the primitive life,
and indeed attempted to resume his place in his bunk, whence he was hauled by force.
Their way lay, as before, across country by narrow lanes, and it was not till the
afternoon that they came out on the high-road, their first high-road; and there disaster,
fleet and unforeseen, sprang out on them disaster momentous indeed to their
expedition, but simply overwhelming in its effect on the after-career of Toad.
They were strolling along the high-road easily, the Mole by the horse’s head, talking to
him, since the horse had complained that he was being frightfully left out of it, and
nobody considered him in the least; the Toad and the Water Rat walking behind the
cart talking together- at least Toad was talking, and Rat was saying at intervals, ‘Yes,
precisely; and what did you say to him?’- and thinking all the time of something very
different, when far behind them they heard a faint warning hum, like the drone of a
distant bee. Glancing back, they saw a small cloud of dust, with a dark centre of
energy, advancing on them at incredible speed, while from out the dust a faint ‘Pooppoop!’ wailed like an uneasy animal in pain. Hardly regarding it, they turned to
resume their conversation, when in an instant (as it seemed) the peaceful scene was
changed, and with a blast of wind and a whirl of sound that made them jump for the
nearest ditch, It was on them! The ‘Poop-poop’ rang with a brazen shout in their ears,
they had a moment’s glimpse of an interior of glittering plate-glass and rich morocco
and the magnificent motor-car, immense, breath-snatching, passionate, with its pilot
tense and hugging his wheel, possessed all earth and air for the fraction of a second,
flung an enveloping cloud of dust that blinded and enwrapped them utterly, and then
dwindled to a speck in the far distance, changed back into a droning bee once more.
The old grey horse, dreaming, as he plodded along, of his quiet paddock, in a new raw
situation such as this simply abandoned himself to his natural emotions.
Rearing, plunging, backing steadily, in spite of all the Mole’s efforts at his head, and all
the Mole’s lively language directed at his better feelings, he drove the cart backwards
towards the deep ditch at the side of the road. It wavered an instant then there was a
heartrending crash- and the canary-coloured cart, their pride and their joy, lay on its
side in the ditch, an irredeemable wreck.
The Rat danced up and down in the road, simply transported with passion.
‘You villains!’ he shouted, shaking both fists, ‘You scoundrels, you highwaymen, you you- road-hogs!- I’ll have the law on you! I’ll report you! I’ll take you through all the
Courts!’ His home-sickness had quite slipped away from him, and for the moment he
was the skipper of the canary-coloured vessel driven on a shoal by the reckless
jockeying of rival mariners, and he was trying to recollect all the fine and biting things
he used to say to masters of steam-launches when their wash, as they drove too near
the bank, used to flood his parlour-carpet at home.
Toad sat straight down in the middle of the dusty road, his legs stretched out before
him, and stared fixedly in the direction of the disappearing motor-car. He breathed
short, his face wore a placid satisfied expression, and at intervals he faintly murmured
‘Poop-poop!’ The Mole was busy trying to quiet the horse, which he succeeded in doing
after a time. Then he went to look at the cart, on its side in the ditch. It was indeed a
sorry sight. Panels and windows smashed, axles hopelessly bent, one wheel off,
sardine-tins scattered over the wide world, and the bird in the bird-cage sobbing
pitifully and calling to be let out.
The Rat came to help him, but their united efforts were not sufficient to right the cart.
‘Hi! Toad!’ they cried. ‘Come and bear a hand, can’t you!’
The Toad never answered a word, or budged from his seat in the road; so they went to
see what was the matter with him. They found him in a sort of a trance, a happy smile
on his face, his eyes still fixed on the dusty wake of their destroyer.
At intervals he was still heard to murmur ‘Poop-poop!’ The Rat shook him by the
shoulder. ‘Are you coming to help us, Toad?’ he demanded sternly.
‘Glorious, stirring sight!’ murmured Toad, never offering to move. ‘The poetry of
motion! The real way to travel! The only way to travel! Here to-day- in next week tomorrow! Villages skipped, towns and cities jumped- always somebody else’s horizon!
O bliss! O poop-poop! ‘O my! O my!’ ‘O stop being an ass, Toad!’ cried the Mole
despairingly.
‘And to think I never knew!’ went on the Toad in a dreamy monotone. ‘All those
wasted years that lie behind me, I never knew, never even dreamt! But now but now
that I know, now that I fully realise! O what a flowery track lies spread before me,
henceforth! What dust-clouds shall spring up behind me as I speed on my reckless
way! What carts I shall fling carelessly into the ditch in the wake of my magnificent
onset! Horrid little carts- common carts- canary-coloured carts!’ ‘What are we to do
with him?’ asked the Mole of the Water Rat.
‘Nothing at all,’ replied the Rat firmly. ‘Because there is really nothing to be done. You
see, I know him from of old. He is now possessed. He has got a new craze, and it
always takes him that way, in its first stage. He’ll continue like that for days now, like
an animal walking in a happy dream, quite useless for all practical purposes. Never
mind him. Let’s go and see what there is to be done about the cart.’ A careful inspection
showed them that, even if they succeeded in righting it by themselves, the cart would
travel no longer. The axles were in a hopeless state, and the missing wheel was
shattered into pieces.
The Rat knotted the horse’s reins over his back and took him by the head, carrying the
bird cage and its hysterical occupant in the other hand. ‘Come on!’ he said grimly to the
Mole. ‘It’s five or six miles to the nearest town, and we shall just have to walk it. The
sooner we make a start the better.’ ‘But what about Toad?’ asked the Mole anxiously, as
they set off together.
‘We can’t leave him here, sitting in the middle of the road by himself, in the distracted
state he’s in! It’s not safe. Supposing another Thing were to come along?’ ‘O, bother
Toad,’ said the Rat savagely; ‘I’ve done with him!’ They had not proceeded very far on
their way, however, when there was a pattering of feet behind them, and Toad caught
them up and thrust a paw inside the elbow of each of them; still breathing short and
staring into vacancy.
‘Now, look here, Toad!’ said the Rat sharply: ‘as soon as we get to the town, you’ll have
to go straight to the police-station, and see if they know anything about that motor-car
and who it belongs to, and lodge a complaint against it. And then you’ll have to go to a
blacksmith’s or a wheelwright’s and arrange for the cart to be fetched and mended and
put to rights. It’ll take time, but it’s not quite a hopeless smash. Meanwhile, the Mole
and I will go to an inn and find comfortable rooms where we can stay till the cart’s
ready, and till your nerves have recovered their shock.’ ‘Police-station! Complaint!’
murmured Toad dreamily. ‘Me complain of that beautiful, that heavenly vision that has
been vouchsafed me! Mend the cart! I’ve done with carts for ever. I never want to see
the cart, or to hear of it, again. O, Ratty! You can’t think how obliged I am to you for
consenting to come on this trip! I wouldn’t have gone without you, and then I might
never have seen that swan, that sunbeam, that thunderbolt! I might never have
heard that entrancing sound, or smelt that bewitching smell! I owe it all to you, my best
of friends!’ The Rat turned from him in despair. ‘You see what it is?’ he said to the
Mole, addressing him across Toad’s head: ‘He’s quite hopeless. I give it up- when we
get to the town we’ll go to the railway station, and with luck we may pick up a train
there that’ll get us back to riverbank to-night. And if ever you catch me going apleasuring with this provoking animal again!’- He snorted, and during the rest of that
weary trudge addressed his remarks exclusively to Mole.
On reaching the town they went straight to the station and deposited Toad in the
second-class waiting-room, giving a porter twopence to keep a strict eye on him. They
then left the horse at an inn stable, and gave what directions they could about the cart
and its contents. Eventually, a slow train having landed them at a station not very far
from Toad Hall, they escorted the spell-bound, sleep-walking Toad to his door, put him
inside it, and instructed his housekeeper to feed him, undress him, and put him to bed.
Then they got out their boat from the boat-house, sculled down the river home, and at a
very late hour sat down to supper in their own cosy riverside parlour, to the Rat’s great
joy and contentment.
The following evening the Mole, who had risen late and taken things very easy all day,
was sitting on the bank fishing, when the Rat, who had been looking up his friends and
gossiping, came strolling along to find him. ‘Heard the news?’ he said. ‘There’s nothing
else being talked about, all along the river bank. Toad went up to Town by an early
train this morning. And he has ordered a large and very expensive motor-car.’
THE Mole had long wanted to make the acquaintance of the Badger. He seemed, by all
accounts, to be such an important personage and, though rarely visible, to make his
unseen influence felt by everybody about the place. But whenever the Mole mentioned
his wish to the Water Rat he always found himself put off. ‘It’s all right,’ the Rat would
say. ‘Badger’ll turn up some day or other he’s always turning up- and then I’ll
introduce you. The best of fellows! But you must not only take him as you find him, but
when you find him.’ ‘Couldn’t you ask him here- dinner or something?’ said the Mole.
‘He wouldn’t come,’ replied the Rat simply. ‘Badger hates Society, and invitations, and
dinner, and all that sort of thing.’ ‘Well, then, supposing we go and call on him?’
suggested the Mole.
‘O, I’m sure he wouldn’t like that at all,’ said the Rat, quite alarmed. ‘He’s so very shy,
he’d be sure to be offended. I’ve never even ventured to call on him at his own home
myself, though I know him so well. Besides, we can’t. It’s quite out of the question,
because he lives in the very middle of the Wild Wood.’
‘Well, supposing he does,’ said the Mole. ‘You told me the Wild Wood was all right,
you know.’ ‘O, I know, I know, so it is,’ replied the Rat evasively. ‘But I think we won’t
go there just now. Not just yet. It’s a long way, and he wouldn’t be at home at this time
of year anyhow, and he’ll be coming along some day, if you’ll wait quietly.’ The Mole
had to be content with this. But the Badger never came along, and every day brought
its amusements, and it was not till summer was long over, and cold and frost and miry
ways kept them much indoors, and the swollen river raced past outside their windows
with a speed that mocked at boating of any sort or kind, that he found his thoughts
dwelling again with much persistence on the solitary grey Badger, who lived his own
life by himself, in his hole in the middle of the Wild Wood.
In the winter time the Rat slept a great deal, retiring early and rising late. During his
short day he sometimes scribbled poetry or did other small domestic jobs about the
house; and, of course, there were always animals dropping in for a chat, and
consequently there was a good deal of story-telling and comparing notes on the past
summer and all its doings.
Such a rich chapter it had been, when one came to look back on it all! With illustrations
so numerous and so very highly coloured! The pageant of the river bank had marched
steadily along, unfolding itself in scene-pictures that succeeded each other in stately
procession. Purple loose strife arrived early, shaking luxuriant tangled locks along the
edge of the mirror whence its own face laughed back at it. Willow-herb, tender and
wistful, like a pink sunset cloud, was not slow to follow. Comfrey, the purple hand-in hand with the white, crept forth to take its place in the line; and at last one morning the
diffident and delaying dog-rose stepped delicately on the stage, and one knew, as if
string-music had announced it in stately chords that strayed into a gavotte, that June at
last was here. One member of the company was still awaited; the shepherd-boy for the
nymphs to woo, the knight for whom the ladies waited at the window, the prince that
was to kiss the sleeping summer back to life and love. But when meadow-sweet,
debonair and odorous in amber jerkin, moved graciously to his place in the group, then
the play was ready to begin.
And what a play it had been! Drowsy animals, snug in their holes while wind and rain
were battering at their doors, recalled still keen mornings, an hour before sunrise, when
the white mist, as yet undispersed, clung closely along the surface of the water; then the
shock of the early plunge, the scamper along the bank, and the radiant transformation
of earth, air, and water, when suddenly the sun was with them again, and grey was
gold and colour was born and sprang out of the earth once more. They recalled the
languorous siesta of hot mid-day, deep in green undergrowth, the sun striking through
in tiny golden shafts and spots; the boating and bathing of the afternoon, the rambles
along dusty lanes and through yellow cornfields; and the long, cool evening at last,
when so many threads were gathered up, so many friendships rounded, and so many
adventures planned for the morrow. There was plenty to talk about on those short
winter days when the animals found themselves round the fire; still, the Mole had a
good deal of spare time on his hands, and so one afternoon, when the Rat in his armchair before the blaze was alternately dozing and trying over rhymes that wouldn’t fit,
he formed the resolution to go out by himself and explore the Wild Wood, and perhaps
strike up an acquaintance with Mr. Badger.
It was a cold still afternoon with a hard steely sky overhead, when he slipped out of the
warm parlour into the open air. The country lay bare and entirely leafless around him,
and he thought that he had never seen so far and so intimately into the insides of things
as on that winter day when Nature was deep in her annual slumber and seemed to
have kicked the clothes off. Copses, dells, quarries and all hidden places, which had
been mysterious mines for exploration in leafy summer, now exposed themselves and
their secrets pathetically, and seemed to ask him to overlook their shabby poverty for a
while, till they could riot in rich masquerade as before, and trick and entice him with
the old deceptions. It was pitiful in a way, and yet cheering- even exhilarating. He was
glad that he liked the country undecorated, hard, and stripped of its finery. He had got
down to the bare bones of it, and they were fine and strong and simple. He did not
want the warm clover and the play of seeding grasses; the screens of quickset, the
billowy drapery of beech and elm seemed best away; and with great cheerfulness of
spirit he pushed on towards the Wild Wood, which lay before him low and
threatening, like a black reef in some still southern sea.
There was nothing to alarm him at first entry. Twigs crackled under his feet, logs
tripped him, funguses on stumps resembled caricatures, and startled him for the
moment by their likeness to something familiar and far away; but that was all fun, and
exciting. It led him on, and he penetrated to where the light was less, and trees
crouched nearer and nearer, and holes made ugly mouths at him on either side.
Everything was very still now. The dusk advanced on him steadily, rapidly, gathering
in behind and before; and the light seemed to be draining away like flood-water.
Then the faces began.
It was over his shoulder, and indistinctly, that he first thought he saw a face; a little evil
wedge-shaped face, looking out at him from a hole. When he turned and confronted it,
the thing had vanished.
He quickened his pace, telling himself cheerfully not to begin imagining things, or
there would be simply no end to it. He passed another hole, and another, and another;
and then- yes!- no!- yes! certainly a little narrow face, with hard eyes, had flashed up
for an instant from a hole, and was gone. He hesitated braced himself up for an effort
and strode on. Then suddenly, and as if it had been so all the time, every hole, far and
near, and there were hundreds of them, seemed to possess its face, coming and going
rapidly, all fixing on him glances of malice and hatred: all hard-eyed and evil and
sharp.
If he could only get away from the holes in the banks, he thought, there would be no
more faces. He swung off the path and plunged into the untrodden places of the wood.
Then the whistling began.
Very faint and shrill it was, and far behind him, when first he heard it; but somehow it
made him hurry forward. Then, still very faint and shrill, it sounded far ahead of him,
and made him hesitate and want to go back. As he halted in indecision it broke out on
either side, and seemed to be caught up and passed on throughout the whole length of
the wood to its farthest limit. They were up and alert and ready, evidently, whoever
they were! And he- he was alone, and unarmed, and far from any help; and the night
was closing in.
Then the pattering began.
He thought it was only falling leaves at first, so slight and delicate was the sound of it.
Then as it grew it took a regular rhythm, and he knew it for nothing else but the patpat-pat of little feet still a very long way off. Was it in front or behind? It seemed to be
first one, and then the other, then both. It grew and it multiplied, till from every quarter
as he listened anxiously, leaning this way and that, it seemed to be closing in on him.
As he stood still to hearken, a rabbit came running hard towards him through the trees.
He waited, expecting it to slacken pace, or to swerve from him into a different course.
Instead, the animal almost brushed him as it dashed past, his face set and hard, his eyes
staring. ‘Get out of this, you fool, get out!’ the Mole heard him mutter as he swung
round a stump and disappeared down a friendly burrow.
The pattering increased till it sounded like sudden hail on the dry leaf-carpet spread
around him. The whole wood seemed running now, running hard, hunting, chasing,
closing in round something or- somebody? In panic, he began to run too, aimlessly, he
knew not whither. He ran up against things, he fell over things and into things, he
darted under things and dodged round things. At last he took refuge in the deep dark
hollow of an old beech tree, which offered shelter, concealment- perhaps even safety,
but who could tell? Anyhow, he was too tired to run any further, and could only
snuggle down into the dry leaves which had drifted into the hollow and hope he was
safe for a time. And as he lay there panting and trembling, and listened to the
whistlings and the patterings outside, he knew it at last, in all its fullness, that dread
thing which other little dwellers in field and hedgerow had encountered here, and
known as their darkest moment- that thing which the Rat had vainly tried to shield him
from- the Terror of the Wild Wood!
Meantime the Rat, warm and comfortable, dozed by his fireside. His paper of half finished verses slipped from his knee, his head fell back, his mouth opened, and he
wandered by the verdant banks of dream-rivers. Then a coal slipped, the fire crackled
and sent up a spurt of flame, and he woke with a start. Remembering what he had been
engaged upon, he reached down to the floor for his verses, pored over them for a
minute, and then looked round for the Mole to ask him if he knew a good rhyme for
something or other.
But the Mole was not there.
He listened for a time. The house seemed very quiet.
Then he called ‘Moly!’ several times, and, receiving no answer, got up and went out
into the hall.
The Mole’s cap was missing from its accustomed peg. His goloshes, which always lay
by the umbrella-stand, were also gone.
The Rat left the house, and carefully examined the muddy surface of the ground
outside, hoping to find the Mole’s tracks. There they were, sure enough.
The goloshes were new, just bought for the winter, and the pimples on their soles were
fresh and sharp. He could see the imprints of them in the mud, running along straight
and purposeful, leading direct to the Wild Wood.
The Rat looked very grave, and stood in deep thought for a minute or two.
Then he reentered the house, strapped a belt round his waist, shoved a brace of pistols
into it, took up a stout cudgel that stood in a corner of the hall, and set off for the Wild
Wood at a smart pace.
It was already getting towards dusk when he reached the first fringe of trees and
plunged without hesitation into the wood, looking anxiously on either side for any sign
of his friend. Here and there wicked little faces popped out of holes, but vanished
immediately at sight of the valorous animal, his pistols, and the great ugly cudgel in his
grasp; and the whistling and pattering, which he had heard quite plainly on his first
entry, died away and ceased, and all was very still.
He made his way manfully through the length of the wood, to its furthest edge; then,
forsaking all paths, he set himself to traverse it, laboriously working over the whole
ground, and all the time calling out cheerfully, ‘Moly, Moly, Moly! Where are you? It’s
me- it’s old Rat!’ He had patiently hunted through the wood for an hour or more, when
at last to his joy he heard a little answering cry. Guiding himself by the sound, he made
his way through the gathering darkness to the foot of an old beech tree, with a hole in
it, and from out of the hole came a feeble voice, saying ‘Ratty! Is that really you?’ The
Rat crept into the hollow, and there he found the Mole, exhausted and still trembling.
‘O Rat!’ he cried, ‘I’ve been so frightened, you can’t think!’ ‘O, I quite understand,’ said
the Rat soothingly. ‘You shouldn’t really have gone and done it, Mole. I did my best to
keep you from it. We river-bankers, we hardly ever come here by ourselves. If we have
to come, we come in couples, at least; then we’re generally all right. Besides, there are a
hundred things one has to know, which we understand all about and you don’t, as yet.
I mean passwords, and signs, and sayings which have power and effect, and plants you
carry in your pocket, and verses you repeat, and dodges and tricks you practise; all
simple enough when you know them, but they’ve got to be known if you’re small, or
you’ll find yourself in trouble. Of course if you were Badger or Otter, it would be quite
another matter.’ ‘Surely the brave Mr. Toad wouldn’t mind coming here by himself,
would he?’ inquired the Mole.
‘Old Toad?’ said the Rat, laughing heartily. ‘He wouldn’t show his face here alone, not
for a whole hatful of golden guineas, Toad wouldn’t.’ The Mole was greatly cheered by
the sound of the Rat’s careless laughter, as well as by the sight of his stick and his
gleaming pistols, and he stopped shivering and began to feel bolder and more himself
again.
‘Now then,’ said the Rat presently, ‘we really must pull ourselves together and make a
start for home while there’s still a little light left. It will never do to spend the night
here, you understand. Too cold, for one thing.’ ‘Dear Ratty,’ said the poor Mole, ‘I’m
dreadfully sorry, but I’m simply dead beat and that’s a solid fact. You must let me rest
here a while longer, and get my strength back, if I’m to get home at all.’ ‘O, all right,’
said the good-natured Rat, ‘rest away. It’s pretty nearly pitch dark now, anyhow; and
there ought to be a bit of a moon later.’ So the Mole got well into the dry leaves and
stretched himself out, and presently dropped off into sleep, though of a broken and
troubled sort; while the Rat covered himself up, too, as best he might, for warmth, and
lay patiently waiting, with a pistol in his paw.
When at last the Mole woke up, much refreshed and in his usual spirits, the Rat said,
‘Now then! I’ll just take a look outside and see if everything’s quiet, and then we really
must be off.’
He went to the entrance of their retreat and put his head out. Then the Mole heard him
saying quietly to himself, ‘Hullo! hullo! here- is- a- go!’ ‘What’s up, Ratty?’ asked the
Mole.
‘Snow is up,’ replied the Rat briefly; ‘or rather, down. It’s snowing hard.’ The Mole
came and crouched beside him, and, looking out, saw the wood that had been so
dreadful to him in quite a changed aspect. Holes, hollows, pools, pitfalls, and other
black menaces to the wayfarer were vanishing fast, and a gleaming carpet of faery was
springing up everywhere, that looked too delicate to be trodden upon by rough feet. A
fine powder filled the air and caressed the cheek with a tingle in its touch, and the
black holes of the trees showed up in a light that seemed to come from below.
‘Well, well, it can’t be helped,’ said the Rat, after pondering. ‘We must make a start,
and take our chance, I suppose. The worst of it is, I don’t exactly know where we are.
And now this snow makes everything look so very different.’ It did indeed. The Mole
would not have known that it was the same wood.
However, they set out bravely, and took the line that seemed most promising, holding
on to each other and pretending with invincible cheerfulness that they recognized an
old friend in every fresh tree that grimly and silently greeted them, or saw openings,
gaps, or paths with a familiar turn in them, in the monotony of white space and black
tree-trunks that refused to vary.
An hour or two later- they had lost all count of time- they pulled up, dispirited, weary,
and hopelessly at sea, and sat down on a fallen tree-trunk to recover their breath and
consider what was to be done. They were aching with fatigue and bruised with
tumbles; they had fallen into several holes and got wet through; the snow was getting
so deep that they could hardly drag their little legs through it, and the trees were
thicker and more like each other than ever. There seemed to be no end to this wood,
and no beginning, and no difference in it, and, worst of all, no way out.
‘We can’t sit here very long,’ said the Rat. ‘We shall have to make another push for it,
and do something or other. The cold is too awful for anything, and the snow will soon
be too deep for us to wade through.’ He peered about him and considered. ‘Look here,’
he went on, ‘this is what occurs to me. There’s a sort of dell down here in front of us,
where the ground seems all hilly and humpy and hummocky. We’ll make our way
down into that, and try and find some sort of shelter, a cave or hole with a dry floor to
it, out of the snow and the wind, and there we’ll have a good rest before we try again,
for we’re both of us pretty dead beat. Besides, the snow may leave off, or something
may turn up.’ So once more they got on their feet, and struggled down into the dell,
where they hunted about for a cave or some corner that was dry and a protection from
the keen wind and the whirling snow. They were investigating one of the hummocky
bits the Rat had spoken of, when suddenly the Mole tripped up and fell forward on his
face with a squeal.
‘O my leg!’ he cried. ‘O my poor shin!’ and he sat up on the snow and nursed his leg in
both his front paws.
‘Poor old Mole!’ said the Rat kindly. ‘You don’t seem to be having much luck to-day,
do you? Let’s have a look at the leg. Yes,’ he went on, going down on his knees, to look,
‘you’ve cut your shin, sure enough. Wait till I get at my handkerchief, and I’ll tie it up
for you.’ ‘I must have tripped over a hidden branch or a stump,’ said the Mole
miserably. ‘O, my! O, my!’ ‘It’s a very clean cut,’ said the Rat, examining it again
attentively. ‘That was never done by a branch or a stump. Looks as if it was made by a
sharp edge of something in metal. Funny!’ He pondered awhile, and examined the
humps and slopes that surrounded them.
‘Well, never mind what done it,’ said the Mole, forgetting his grammar in his pain. ‘It
hurts just the same, whatever done it.’ But the Rat, after carefully tying up the leg with
his handkerchief, had left him and was busy scraping in the snow.
He scratched and shovelled and explored, all four legs working busily, while the Mole
waited impatiently, remarking at intervals, ‘O, come on, Rat!’ Suddenly the Rat cried
‘Hooray!’ and then ‘Hooray-oo-ray-oo-ray-oo-ray!’ and fell to executing a feeble jig in
the snow.
‘What have you found, Ratty?’ asked the Mole, still nursing his leg.
‘Come and see!’ said the delighted Rat, as he jigged on.
The Mole hobbled up to the spot and had a good look.
‘Well,’ he said at last, slowly, ‘I see it right enough. Seen the same sort of thing before,
lots of times. Familiar object, I call it. A door-scraper! Well, what of it? Why dance jigs
around a door-scraper?’ ‘But don’t you see what it means, you- you dull-witted
animal?’ cried the Rat impatiently.
‘Of course I see what it means,’ replied the Mole. ‘It simply means that some very
careless and forgetful person has left his door-scraper lying about in the middle of the
Wild Wood, just where it’s sure to trip everybody up. Very thoughtless of him, I call it.
When I get home I shall go and complain about it to- to somebody or other, see if I
don’t!’ ‘O, dear! O, dear!’ cried the Rat, in despair at his obtuseness. ‘Here, stop arguing
and come and scrape!’ And he set to work again and made the snow fly in all directions
around him.
After some further toil his efforts were rewarded, and a very shabby door-mat lay
exposed to view.
‘There, what did I tell you?’ exclaimed the Rat in great triumph.
‘Absolutely nothing whatever,’ replied the Mole, with perfect truthfulness.
‘Well now,’ he went on, ‘you seem to have found another piece of domestic litter, done
for and thrown away, and I suppose you’re perfectly happy. Better go ahead and dance
your jig round that if you’ve got to, and get it over, and then perhaps we can go on and
not waste any more time over rubbish-heaps. Can we eat a doormat? Or sleep under a
door-mat? Or sit on a door-mat and sledge home over the snow on it, you exasperating
rodent?’ ‘Do- you- mean- to- say,’ cried the excited Rat, ‘that this door-mat doesn’t tell
you anything?’ ‘Really, Rat,’ said the Mole, quite pettishly, ‘I think we’d had enough of
this folly. Who ever heard of a door-mat telling anyone anything? They simply don’t do
it. They are not that sort at all. Door-mats know their place.’ ‘Now look here, you- you
thick-headed beast,’ replied the Rat, really angry, ‘this must stop. Not another word,
but scrape- scrape and scratch and dig and hunt round, especially on the sides of the
hummocks, if you want to sleep dry and warm to-night, for it’s our last chance!’ The
Rat attacked a snow-bank beside them with ardour, probing with his cudgel
everywhere and then digging with fury; and the Mole scraped busily too, more to
oblige the Rat than for any other reason, for his opinion was that his friend was getting
light-headed.
Some ten minutes’ hard work, and the point of the Rat’s cudgel struck something that
sounded hollow. He worked till he could get a paw through and feel; then called the
Mole to come and help him. Hard at it went the two animals, till at last the result of
their labours stood full in view of the astonished and hitherto incredulous Mole.
In the side of what had seemed to be a snow-bank stood a solid-looking little door,
painted a dark green. An iron bell-pull hung by the side, and below it, on a small brass
plate, neatly engraved in square capital letters, they could read by the aid of moonlight
MR. BADGER.
The Mole fell backwards on the snow from sheer surprise and delight. ‘Rat!’ he cried in
penitence, ‘you’re a wonder! A real wonder, that’s what you are. I see it all now! You
argued it out, step by step, in that wise head of yours, from the very moment that I fell
and cut my shin, and you looked at the cut, and at once your majestic mind said to
itself, “Door-scraper!” And then you turned to and found the very door-scraper that
done it! Did you stop there? No. Some people would have been quite satisfied; but not
you. Your intellect went on working.
“Let me only just find a door-mat,” says you to yourself, “and my theory is proved!”
And of course you found your door-mat. You’re so clever, I believe you could find
anything you liked. “Now,” says you, “that door exists, as plain as if I saw it. There’s
nothing else remains to be done but to find it!” Well, I’ve read about that sort of thing
in books, but I’ve never come across it before in real life.
You ought to go where you’ll be properly appreciated. You’re simply wasted here,
among us fellows. If I only had your head, Ratty-’
‘But as you haven’t,’ interrupted the Rat, rather unkindly, ‘I suppose you’re going to sit
on the snow all night and talk? Get up at once and hang on to that bellpull you see
there, and ring hard, as hard as you can, while I hammer!’ While the Rat attacked the
door with his stick, the Mole sprang up at the bellpull, clutched it and swung there,
both feet well off the ground, and from quite a long way off they could faintly hear a
deep-toned bell respond.
THEY waited patiently for what seemed a very long time, stamping in the snow to
keep their feet warm. At last they heard the sound of slow shuffling footsteps
approaching the door from the inside. It seemed, as the Mole remarked to the Rat, like
some one walking in carpet slippers that were too large for him and down at heel;
which was intelligent of Mole, because that was exactly what it was.
There was the noise of a bolt shot back, and the door opened a few inches, enough to
show a long snout and a pair of sleepy blinking eyes.
‘Now, the very next time this happens,’ said a gruff and suspicious voice, ‘I shall be
exceedingly angry. Who is it this time, disturbing people on such a night? Speak up!’
‘Oh, Badger,’ cried the Rat, ‘let us in, please. It’s me, Rat, and my friend Mole, and
we’ve lost our way in the snow.’ ‘What, Ratty, my dear little man!’ exclaimed the
Badger, in quite a different voice. ‘Come along in, both of you, at once. Why, you must
be perished. Well I never! Lost in the snow! And in the Wild Wood, too, and at this
time of night! But come in with you.’
The two animals tumbled over each other in their eagerness to get inside, and heard the
door shut behind them with great joy and relief.
The Badger, who wore a long dressing-gown, and whose slippers were indeed very
down at heel, carried a flat candlestick in his paw and had probably been on his way to
bed when their summons sounded. He looked kindly down on them and patted both
their heads. ‘This is not the sort of night for small animals to be out,’ he said paternally.
‘I’m afraid you’ve been up to some of your pranks again, Ratty. But come along; come
into the kitchen. There’s a first-rate fire there, and supper and everything.’ He shuffled
on in front of them, carrying the light, and they followed him, nudging each other in an
anticipating sort of way, down a long, gloomy, and, to tell the truth, decidedly shabby
passage, into a sort of a central hall, out of which they could dimly see other long
tunnel-like passages branching, passages mysterious and without apparent end. But
there were doors in the hall as well- stout oaken comfortable-looking doors. One of
these the Badger flung open, and at once they found themselves in all the glow and
warmth of a large fire-lit kitchen.
The floor was well-worn red brick, and on the wide hearth burnt a fire of logs, between
two attractive chimney-corners tucked away in the wall, well out of any suspicion of
draught. A couple of high-backed settles, facing each other on either side of the fire,
gave further sitting accommodations for the sociably disposed. In the middle of the
room stood a long table of plain boards placed on trestles, with benches down each
side. At one end of it, where an arm-chair stood pushed back, were spread the remains
of the Badger’s plain but ample supper. Rows of spotless plates winked from the
shelves of the dresser at the far end of the room, and from the rafters overhead hung
hams, bundles of dried herbs, nets of onions, and baskets of eggs. It seemed a place
where heroes could fitly feast after victory, where weary harvesters could line up in
scores along the table and keep their Harvest Home with mirth and song, or where two
or three friends of simple tastes could sit about as they pleased and eat and smoke and
talk in comfort and contentment.
The ruddy brick floor smiled up at the smoky ceiling; the oaken settles, shiny with long
wear, exchanged cheerful glances with each other; plates on the dresser grinned at pots
on the shelf, and the merry firelight flickered and played over everything without
distinction.
The kindly Badger thrust them down on a settle to toast themselves at the fire, and
bade them remove their wet coats and boots. Then he fetched them dressinggowns and
slippers, and himself bathed the Mole’s shin with warm water and mended the cut
with sticking-plaster till the whole thing was just as good as new, if not better. In the
embracing light and warmth, warm and dry at last, with weary legs propped up in
front of them, and a suggestive clink of plates being arranged on the table behind, it
seemed to the storm-driven animals, now in safe anchorage, that the cold and trackless
Wild Wood just left outside was miles and miles away, and all that they had suffered in
it a half-forgotten dream.
When at last they were thoroughly toasted, the Badger summoned them to the table,
where he had been busy laying a repast. They had felt pretty hungry before, but when
they actually saw at last the supper that was spread for them, really it seemed only a
question of what they should attack first where all was so attractive, and whether the
other things would obligingly wait for them till they had time to give them attention.
Conversation was impossible for a long time; and when it was slowly resumed, it was
that regrettable sort of conversation that results from talking with your mouth full. The
Badger did not mind that sort of thing at all, nor did he take any notice of elbows on
the table, or everybody speaking at once. As he did not go into Society himself, he had
got an idea that these things belonged to the things that didn’t really matter. (We know
of course that he was wrong, and took too narrow a view; because they do matter very
much, though it would take too long to explain why.) He sat in his arm-chair at the
head of the table, and nodded gravely at intervals as the animals told their story; and
he did not seem surprised or shocked at anything, and he never said, ‘I told you so,’ or,
‘Just what I always said,’ or remarked that they ought to have done so-and-so, or ought
not to have done something else. The Mole began to feel very friendly towards him.
When supper was really finished at last, and each animal felt that his skin was now as
tight as was decently safe, and that by this time he didn’t care a hang for anybody or
anything, they gathered round the glowing embers of the great wood fire, and thought
how jolly it was to be sitting up so late, and so independent, and so full; and after they
had chatted for a time about things in general, the Badger said heartily, ‘Now then! tell
us the news from your part of the world. How’s old Toad going on?’ ‘Oh, from bad to
worse,’ said the Rat gravely, while the Mole, cocked up on a settle and basking in the
firelight, his heels higher than his head, tried to look properly mournful. ‘Another
smash-up only last week, and a bad one. You see, he will insist on driving himself, and
he’s hopelessly incapable. If he’d only employ a decent, steady, well-trained animal,
pay him good wages, and leave everything to him, he’d get on all right. But no; he’s
convinced he’s a heaven-born driver, and nobody can teach him anything; and all the
rest follows.’ ‘How many has he had?’ inquired the Badger gloomily.
‘Smashes, or machines?’ asked the Rat. ‘Oh, well, after all, it’s the same thingwith Toad.
This is the seventh. As for the others- you know that coach-house of his? Well, it’s piled
up- literally piled up to the roof- with fragments of motorcars, none of them bigger
than your hat! That accounts for the other six- so far as they can be accounted for.’ ‘He’s
been in hospital three times,’ put in the Mole; ‘and as for the fines he’s had to pay, it’s
simply awful to think of.’ ‘Yes, and that’s part of the trouble,’ continued the Rat.
‘Toad’s rich, we all know; but he’s not a millionaire. And he’s a hopelessly bad driver,
and quite regardless of law and order. Killed or ruined- it’s got to be one of the two
things, sooner or later. Badger! we’re his friends- oughtn’t we to do something?’
The Badger went through a bit of hard thinking. ‘Now look here!’ he said at last, rather
severely; ‘of course you know I can’t do anything now?’ His two friends assented, quite
understanding his point. No animal, according to the rules of animal-etiquette, is ever
expected to do anything strenuous, or heroic, or even moderately active during the offseason of winter. All are sleepysome actually asleep. All are weather-bound, more or
less; and all are resting from arduous days and nights, during which every muscle in
them has been severely tested, and every energy kept at full stretch.
‘Very well then!’ continued the Badger. ‘But, when once the year has really turned, and
the nights are shorter, and halfway through them one rouses and feels fidgety and
wanting to be up and doing by sunrise, if not before- you know!-’ Both animals nodded
gravely. They knew!
‘Well, then,’ went on the Badger, ‘we- that is, you and me and our friend the Mole herewe’ll take Toad seriously in hand. We’ll stand no nonsense whatever.
We’ll bring him back to reason, by force if need be. We’ll make him be a sensible Toad.
We’ll- you’re asleep, Rat!’ ‘Not me!’ said the Rat, waking up with a jerk.
‘He’s been asleep two or three times since supper,’ said the Mole, laughing.
He himself was feeling quite wakeful and even lively, though he didn’t know why. The
reason was, of course, that be being naturally an underground animal by birth and
breeding, the situation of Badger’s house exactly suited him and made him feel at
home; while the Rat, who slept every night in a bedroom the windows of which opened
on a breezy river, naturally felt the atmosphere still and oppressive.
‘Well, it’s time we were all in bed,’ said the Badger, getting up and fetching flat
candlesticks. ‘Come along, you two, and I’ll show you your quarters. And take your
time tomorrow morning- breakfast at any hour you please!’ He conducted the two
animals to a long room that seemed half bedchamber and half lot. The Badger’s winter
stores, which indeed were visible everywhere, took up half the room- piles of apples,
turnips, and potatoes, baskets full of nuts, and jars of honey; but the two little white
beds on the remainder of the floor looked soft and inviting, and the linen on them,
though coarse, was clean and smelt beautifully of lavender; and the Mole and the
Water Rat, shaking off their garments in some thirty seconds, tumbled in between the
sheets in great joy and contentment.
In accordance with the kindly Badger’s injunctions, the two tired animals came down
to breakfast very late next morning, and found a bright fire burning in the kitchen, and
two young hedgehogs sitting on a bench at the table, eating oatmeal porridge out of
wooden bowls. The hedgehogs dropped their spoons, rose to their feet, and ducked
their heads respectfully as the two entered.
‘There, sit down, sit down,’ said the Rat pleasantly, ‘and go on with your porridge.
Where have you youngsters come from? Lost your way in the snow, I suppose?’
‘Yes, please, sir,’ said the elder of the two hedgehogs respectfully. ‘Me and little Billy
here, we was trying to find our way to school- mother would have us go, was the
weather ever so- and of course we lost ourselves, sir, and Billy he got frightened and
took and cried, being young and faint-hearted. And at last we happened up against Mr.
Badger’s back door, and made so bold as to knock, sir, for Mr. Badger he’s a kindhearted gentleman, as everyone knows-’ ‘I understand,’ said the Rat, cutting himself
some rashers from a side of bacon, while the Mole dropped some eggs into a saucepan.
‘And what’s the weather like outside? You needn’t “sir” me quite so much,’ he added.
‘O, terrible bad, sir, terrible deep the snow is,’ said the hedgehog. ‘No getting out for
the likes of you gentlemen to-day.’ ‘Where’s Mr. Badger?’ inquired the Mole, as he
warmed the coffee-pot before the fire.
‘The master’s gone into his study, sir,’ replied the hedgehog, ‘and he said as how he
was going to be particular busy this morning, and on no account was he to be
disturbed.’ This explanation, of course, was thoroughly understood by every one
present.
The fact is, as already set forth, when you live a life of intense activity for six months in
the year, and of comparative or actual somnolence for the other six, during the latter
period you cannot be continually pleading sleepiness when there are people about or
things to be done. The excuse gets monotonous. The animals well knew that Badger,
having eaten a hearty breakfast, had retired to his study and settled himself in an armchair with his legs up on another and a red cotton handkerchief over his face, and was
being ‘busy’ in the usual way at this time of the year.
The front-door bell clanged loudly, and the Rat, who was very greasy with buttered
toast, sent Billy, the smaller hedgehog, to see who it might be. There was a sound of
much stamping in the hall, and presently Billy returned in front of the Otter, who
threw himself on the Rat with an embrace and a shout of affectionate greeting.
‘Get off!’ spluttered the Rat, with his mouth full.
‘Thought I should find you here all right,’ said the Otter cheerfully. ‘They were all in a
great state of alarm along River Bank when I arrived this morning.
Rat never been home all night- nor Mole either- something dreadful must have
happened, they said; and the snow had covered up all your tracks, of course. But I
knew that when people were in any fix they mostly went to Badger, or else Badger got
to know of it somehow, so I came straight off here, through the Wild Wood and the
snow! My! it was fine, coming through the snow as the red sun was rising and showing
against the black tree-trunks! As you went along in the stillness, every now and then
masses of snow slid off the branches suddenly with a flop! making you jump and run
for cover. Snow-castles and snow-caverns had sprung up out of nowhere in the nightand snow bridges, terraces, ramparts- I could have stayed and played with them for
hours. Here and there great branches had been torn away by the sheer weight of the
snow, and robins perched and hopped on them in their perky conceited way, just as if
they had done it themselves. A ragged string of wild geese passed overhead, high on
the grey sky, and a few rooks whirled over the trees, inspected, and flapped off
homewards with a disgusted expression; but I met no sensible being to ask the news of.
About halfway across I came on a rabbit sitting on a stump, cleaning his silly face with
his paws.
He was a pretty scared animal when I crept up behind him and placed a heavy forepaw on his shoulder. I had to cuff his head once or twice to get any sense out of it at all.
At last I managed to extract from him that Mole had been seen in the Wild Wood last
night by one of them. It was the talk of the burrows, he said, how Mole, Mr. Rat’s
particular friend, was in a bad fix; how he had lost his way, and “They” were up and
out hunting, and were chivvying him round and round.
“Then why didn’t any of you do something?” I asked. “You mayn’t be blest with
brains, but there are hundreds and hundreds of you, big, stout fellows, as fat as butter,
and your burrows running in all directions, and you could have taken him in and made
him safe and comfortable, or tried to, at all events.” “What, us?” he merely said: “do
something? us rabbits?” So I cuffed him again and left him.
There was nothing else to be done. At any rate, I had learnt something; and if I had had
the luck to meet any of “Them” I’d have learnt something more- or they would.’
‘Weren’t you at all- er- nervous?’ asked the Mole, some of yesterday’s terror coming
back to him at the mention of the Wild Wood.
‘Nervous?’ The Otter showed a gleaming set of strong white teeth as he laughed. ‘I’d
give ‘em nerves if any of them tried anything on with me. Here, Mole, fry me some
slices of ham, like the good little chap you are. I’m frightfully hungry, and I’ve got any
amount to say to Ratty here. Haven’t seen him for an age.’ So the good-natured Mole,
having cut some slices of ham, set the hedgehogs to fry it, and returned to his own
breakfast, while the Otter and the Rat, their heads together, eagerly talked river-shop,
which is long shop and talk that is endless, running on like the babbling river itself.
A plate of fried ham had just been cleared and sent back for more, when the Badger
entered, yawning and rubbing his eyes, and greeted them all in his quiet, simple way,
with kind enquiries for every one. ‘It must be getting on for luncheon time,’ he
remarked to the Otter. ‘Better stop and have it with us. You must be hungry, this cold
morning.’ ‘Rather!’ replied the Otter, winking at the Mole. ‘The sight of these greedy
young hedgehogs stuffing themselves with fried ham makes me feel positively
famished.’ The hedgehogs, who were just beginning to feel hungry again after their
porridge, and after working so hard at their frying, looked timidly up at Mr. Badger,
but were too shy to say anything.
‘Here, you two youngsters be off home to your mother,’ said the Badger kindly. ‘I’ll
send some one with you to show you the way. You won’t want any dinner to-day, I’ll
be bound.’
He gave them sixpence apiece and a pat on the head, and they went off with much
respectful swinging of caps and touching of forelocks.
Presently they all sat down to luncheon together. The Mole found himself placed next
to Mr. Badger, and, as the other two were still deep in river-gossip from which nothing
could divert them, he took the opportunity to tell Badger how comfortable and homelike it all felt to him. ‘Once well underground,’ he said, ‘you know exactly where you
are. Nothing can happen to you, and nothing can get at you. You’re entirely your own
master, and you don’t have to consult anybody or mind what they say. Things go on all
the same overhead, and you let ‘em, and don’t bother about ‘em. When you want to, up
you go, and there the things are, waiting for you.’ The Badger simply beamed on him.
‘That’s exactly what I say,’ he replied.
‘There’s no security, or peace and tranquillity, except underground. And then, if your
ideas get larger and you want to expand- why, a dig and a scrape, and there you are! If
you feel your house is a bit too big, you stop up a hole or two, and there you are again!
No builders, no tradesmen, no remarks passed on you by fellows looking over your
wall, and, above all, no weather. Look at Rat, now. A couple of feet of flood water, and
he’s got to move into hired lodgings; uncomfortable, inconveniently situated, and
horribly expensive. Take Toad. I say nothing against Toad Hall; quite the best house in
these parts, as a house. But supposing a fire breaks out- where’s Toad? Supposing tiles
are blown off, or walls sink or crack, or windows get broken- where’s Toad? Supposing
the rooms are draughty- I hate a draught myself- where’s Toad? No, up and out of
doors is good enough to roam about and get one’s living in; but underground to come
back to at last- that’s my idea of home!’ The Mole assented heartily; and the Badger in
consequence got very friendly with him. ‘When lunch is over,’ he said, ‘I’ll take you all
round this little place of mine. I can see you’ll appreciate it. You understand what
domestic architecture ought to be, you do.’ After luncheon, accordingly, when the other
two had settled themselves into the chimney-corner and had started a heated argument
on the subject of eels, the Badger lighted a lantern and bade the Mole follow him.
Crossing the hall, they passed down one of the principal tunnels, and the wavering
light of the lantern gave glimpses on either side of rooms both large and small, some
mere cupboards, others nearly as broad and imposing as Toad’s dining-hall. A narrow
passage at right angles led them into another corridor, and here the same thing was
repeated. The Mole was staggered at the size, the extent, the ramifications of it all; at
the length of the dim passages, the solid vaultings of the crammed storechambers, the
masonry everywhere, the pillars, the arches, the pavements. ‘How on earth, Badger,’ he
said at last, ‘did you ever find time and strength to do all this? It’s astonishing!’ ‘It
would be astonishing indeed,’ said the Badger simply, ‘if I had done it. But as a matter
of fact I did none of it- only cleaned out the passages and chambers, as far as I had need
of them. There’s lots more of it, all round about. I see you don’t understand, and I must
explain it to you. Well, very long ago, on the spot where the Wild Wood waves now,
before ever it had planted itself and grown up to what it now is, there was a city- a city
of people, you know. Here, where we are standing, they lived, and walked, and talked,
and slept, and carried on their business.
Here they stabled their horses and feasted, from here they rode out to fight or drove
out to trade. They were a powerful people, and rich, and great builders.
They built to last, for they thought their city would last for ever.’ ‘But what has become
of them all?’ asked the Mole.
‘Who can tell?’ said the Badger. ‘People come- they stay for a while, they flourish, they
build- and they go. It is their way. But we remain. There were badgers here, I’ve been
told, long before that same city ever came to be. And now there are badgers here again.
We are an enduring lot, and we may move out for a time, but we wait, and are patient,
and back we come. And so it will ever be.’ ‘Well, and when they went at last, those
people?’ said the Mole.
‘When they went,’ continued the Badger, ‘the strong winds and persistent rains took
the matter in hand, patiently, ceaselessly, year after year. Perhaps we badgers too, in
our small way, helped a little- who knows? It was all down, down, down, graduallyruin and levelling and disappearance. Then it was all up, up, up, gradually, as seeds
grew to saplings, and saplings to forest trees, and bramble and fern came creeping in to
help. Leaf-mould rose and obliterated, streams in their winter freshets brought sand
and soil to clog and to cover, and in course of time our home was ready for us again,
and we moved in. Up above us, on the surface, the same thing happened. Animals
arrived, liked the look of the place, took up their quarters, settled down, spread, and
flourished. They didn’t bother themselves about the past- they never do; they’re too
busy. The place was a bit humpy and hillocky, naturally, and full of holes; but that was
rather an advantage. And they don’t bother about the future, either- the future when
perhaps the people will move in again- for a time- as may very well be. The Wild
Wood is pretty well populated by now; with all the usual lot, good, bad, and
indifferent- I name no names. It takes all sorts to make a world. But I fancy you know
something about them yourself by this time.’ ‘I do indeed,’ said the Mole, with a slight
shiver.
‘Well, well,’ said the Badger, patting him on the shoulder, ‘it was your first experience
of them, you see. They’re not so bad really; and we must all live and let live. But I’ll
pass the word around to-morrow, and I think you’ll have no further trouble. Any
friend of mine walks where he likes in this country, or I’ll know the reason why!’ When
they got back to the kitchen again, they found the Rat walking up and down, very
restless. The underground atmosphere was oppressing him and getting on his nerves,
and he seemed really to be afraid that the river would run away if he wasn’t there to
look after it. So he had his overcoat on, and his pistols thrust into his belt again. ‘Come
along, Mole,’ he said anxiously, as soon as he caught sight of them. ‘We must get off
while it’s daylight. Don’t want to spend another night in the Wild Wood again.’
‘It’ll be all right, my fine fellow,’ said the Otter. ‘I’m coming along with you, and I
know every path blindfold; and if there’s a head that needs to be punched, you can
confidently rely upon me to punch it.’ ‘You really needn’t fret, Ratty,’ added the Badger
placidly. ‘My passages run further than you think, and I’ve bolt-holes to the edge of the
wood in several directions, though I don’t care for everybody to know about them.
When you really have to go, you shall leave by one of my short cuts. Meantime, make
yourself easy, and sit down again.’ The Rat was nevertheless still anxious to be off and
attend to his river, so the Badger, taking up his lantern again, led the way along a
damp and airless tunnel that wound and dipped, part vaulted, part hewn through solid
rock, for a weary distance that seemed to be miles. At last daylight began to show itself
confusedly through tangled growth overhanging the mouth of the passage; and the
Badger, bidding them a hasty good-bye, pushed them hurriedly through the opening,
made everything look as natural as possible again, with creepers, brushwood, and dead
leaves, and retreated.
They found themselves standing on the very edge of the Wild Wood. Rocks and
brambles and tree-roots behind them, confusedly heaped and tangled; in front, a great
space of quiet fields, hemmed by lines of hedges black on the snow, and, far ahead, a
glint of the familiar old river, while the wintry sun hung red and low on the horizon.
The Otter, as knowing all the paths, took charge of the party, and they trailed out on a
bee-line for a distant stile. Pausing there a moment and looking back, they saw the
whole mass of the Wild Wood, dense, menacing, compact, grimly set in vast white
surroundings; simultaneously they turned and made swiftly for home, for firelight and
the familiar things it played on, for the voice, sounding cheerily outside their window,
of the river that they knew and trusted in all its moods, that never made them afraid
with any amazement.
As he hurried along, eagerly anticipating the moment when he would be at home again
among the things he knew and liked, the Mole saw clearly that he was an animal of
tilled field and hedge-row, linked to the ploughed furrow, the frequented pasture, the
lane of evening lingerings, the cultivated garden-plot. For others the asperities, the
stubborn endurance, or the clash of actual conflict, that went with Nature in the rough;
he must be wise, must keep to the pleasant places in which his lines were laid and
which held adventure enough, in their way, to last for a lifetime.
THE sheep ran huddling together against the hurdles, blowing out thin nostrils and
stamping with delicate fore-feet, their heads thrown back and a light steam rising from
the crowded sheep-pen into the frosty air, as the two animals hastened by in high
spirits, with much chatter and laughter. They were returning across country after a
long day’s outing with Otter, hunting and exploring on the wide uplands where certain
streams tributary to their own River had their first small beginnings; and the shades of
the short winter day were closing in on them, and they had still some distance to go.
Plodding at random across the plough, they had heard the sheep and had made for
them; and now, leading from the sheep-pen, they found a beaten track that made
walking a lighter business, and responded, moreover, to that small inquiring
something which all animals carry inside them, saying unmistakably, ‘Yes, quite right;
this leads home!’ ‘It looks as if we were coming to a village,’ said the Mole somewhat
dubiously, slackening his pace, as the track, that had in time become a path and then
had developed into a lane, now handed them over to the charge of a well-metalled
road. The animals did not hold with villages, and their own highways, thickly
frequented as they were, took an independent course, regardless of church, post office,
or public-house.
‘Oh, never mind!’ said the Rat. ‘At this season of the year they’re all safe indoors by this
time, sitting round the fire; men, women, and children, dogs and cats and all. We shall
slip through all right, without any bother or unpleasantness, and we can have a look at
them through their windows if you like, and see what they’re doing.’ The rapid
nightfall of mid-December had quite beset the little village as they approached it on
soft feet over a first thin fall of powdery snow. Little was visible but squares of a dusky
orange-red on either side of the street, where the firelight or lamplight of each cottage
overflowed through the casements into the dark world without. Most of the low
latticed windows were innocent of blinds, and to the lookers-in from outside, the
inmates, gathered round the tea-table, absorbed in handiwork, or talking with laughter
and gesture, had each that happy grace which is the last thing the skilled actor shall
capture- the natural grace which goes with perfect unconsciousness of observation.
Moving at will from one theatre to another, the two spectators, so far from home
themselves, had something of wistfulness in their eyes as they watched a cat being
stroked, a sleepy child picked up and huddled off to bed, or a tired man stretch and
knock out his pipe on the end of a smouldering log.
But it was from one little window, with its blind drawn down, a mere blank
transparency on the night, that the sense of home and the little curtained world within
walls- the larger stressful world of outside Nature shut out and forgottenmost pulsated.
Close against the white blind hung a bird-cage, clearly silhouetted, every wire, perch,
and appurtenance distinct and recognisable, even to yesterday’s dull-edged lump of
sugar. On the middle perch the fluffy occupant, head tucked well into feathers, seemed
so near to them as to be easily stroked, had they tried; even the delicate tips of his
plumped-out plumage pencilled plainly on the illuminated screen. As they looked, the
sleepy little fellow stirred uneasily, woke, shook himself, and raised his head. They
could see the gape of his tiny beak as he yawned in a bored sort of way, looked round,
and then settled his head into his back again, while the ruffled feathers gradually
subsided into perfect stillness.
Then a gust of bitter wind took them in the back of the neck, a small sting of frozen
sleet on the skin woke them as from a dream, and they knew their toes to be cold and
their legs tired, and their own home distant a weary way.
Once beyond the village, where the cottages ceased abruptly, on either side of the road
they could smell through the darkness the friendly fields again; and they braced
themselves for the last long stretch, the home stretch, the stretch that we know is bound
to end, some time, in the rattle of the door-latch, the sudden firelight, and the sight of
familiar things greeting us as long-absent travellers from far over-sea. They plodded
along steadily and silently, each of them thinking his own thoughts. The Mole’s ran a
good deal on supper, as it was pitch-dark, and it was all a strange country for him as
far as he knew, and he was following obediently in the wake of the Rat, leaving the
guidance entirely to him. As for the Rat, he was walking a little way ahead, as his habit
was, his shoulders humped, his eyes fixed on the straight grey road in front of him; so
he did not notice poor Mole when suddenly the summons reached him, and took him
like an electric shock.
We others, who have long lost the more subtle of the physical senses, have not even
proper terms to express an animal’s inter-communications with his surroundings,
living or otherwise, and have only the word ‘smell,’ for instance, to include the whole
range of delicate thrills which murmur in the nose of the animal night and day,
summoning, warning, inciting, repelling. It was one of these mysterious fairy calls from
out the void that suddenly reached Mole in the darkness, making him tingle through
and through with its very familiar appeal, even while yet he could not clearly
remember what it was. He stopped dead in his tracks, his nose searching hither and
thither in its efforts to recapture the fine filament, the telegraphic current, that had so
strongly moved him. A moment, and he had caught it again; and with it this time came
recollection in fullest flood.
Home! That was what they meant, those caressing. appeals, those soft touches wafted
through the air, those invisible little hands pulling and tugging, all one way! Why, it
must be quite close by him at that moment, his old home that he had hurriedly forsaken
and never sought again, that day when he first found the river! And now it was
sending out its scouts and its messengers to capture him and bring him in. Since his
escape on that bright morning he had hardly given it a thought, so absorbed had he
been in his new life, in all its pleasures, its surprises, its fresh and captivating
experiences. Now, with a rush of old memories, how clearly it stood up before him, in
the darkness! Shabby indeed, and small and poorly furnished, and yet his, the home he
had made for himself, the home he had been so happy to get back to after his day’s
work.
And the home had been happy with him, too, evidently, and was missing him, and
wanted him back, and was telling him so, through his nose, sorrowfully, reproachfully,
but with no bitterness or anger; only with plaintive reminder that it was there, and
wanted him.
The call was clear, the summons was plain. He must obey it instantly, and go.
‘Ratty!’ he called, full of joyful excitement, ‘hold on! Come back! I want you, quick!’
‘Oh, come along, Mole, do!’ replied the Rat cheerfully, still plodding along.
‘Please stop, Ratty!’ pleaded the poor Mole, in anguish of heart. ‘You don’t understand!
It’s my home, my old home! I’ve just come across the smell of it, and it’s close by here,
really quite close. And I must go to it, I must, I must! Oh, come back, Ratty! Please,
please come back!’ The Rat was by this time very far ahead, too far to hear clearly what
the Mole was calling, too far to catch the sharp note of painful appeal in his voice. And
he was much taken up with the weather, for he too could smell something- something
suspiciously like approaching snow.
‘Mole, we mustn’t stop now, really!’ he called back. ‘We’ll come for it to-morrow,
whatever it is you’ve found. But I daren’t stop now- it’s late, and the snow’s coming on
again, and I’m not sure of the way! And I want your nose, Mole, so come on quick,
there’s a good fellow!’ And the Rat pressed forward on his way without waiting for an
answer.
Poor Mole stood alone in the road, his heart torn asunder, and a big sob gathering,
gathering, somewhere low down inside him, to leap up to the surface presently, he
knew, in passionate escape. But even under such a test as this his loyalty to his friend
stood firm. Never for a moment did he dream of abandoning him.
Meanwhile, the wafts from his old home pleaded, whispered, conjured, and finally
claimed him imperiously. He dared not tarry longer within their magic circle. With a
wrench that tore his very heartstrings he set his face down the road and followed
submissively in the track of the Rat, while faint, thin little smells, still dogging his
retreating nose, reproached him for his new friendship and his callous forgetfulness.
With an effort he caught up to the unsuspecting Rat, who began chattering cheerfully
about what they would do when they got back, and how jolly a fire of logs in the
parlour would be, and what a supper he meant to eat; never noticing his companion’s
silence and distressful state of mind. At last, however, when they had gone some
considerable way further, and were passing some tree-stumps at the edge of a copse
that bordered the road, he stopped and said kindly, ‘Look here, Mole old chap, you
seem dead tired. No talk left in you, and your feet dragging like lead. We’ll sit down
here for a minute and rest. The snow has held off so far, and the best part of our
journey is over.’
The Mole subsided forlornly on a tree-stump and tried to control himself, for he felt it
surely coming. The sob he had fought with so long refused to be beaten.
Up and up, it forced its way to the air, and then another, and another, and others thick
and fast; till poor Mole at last gave up the struggle, and cried freely and helplessly and
openly, now that he knew it was all over and he had lost what he could hardly be said
to have found.
The Rat, astonished and dismayed at the violence of Mole’s paroxysm of grief, did not
dare to speak for a while. At last he said, very quietly and sympathetically, ‘What is it,
old fellow? Whatever can be the matter? Tell us your trouble, and let me see what I can
do.’ Poor Mole found it difficult to get any words out between the upheavals of his
chest that followed one upon another so quickly and held back speech and choked it as
it came. ‘I know it’s a- shabby, dingy little place,’ he sobbed forth at last, brokenly: ‘not
like- your cosy quarters- or Toad’s beautiful hall- or Badger’s great house- but it was
my own little home- and I was fond of it- and I went away and forgot all about it- and
then I smelt it suddenly- on the road, when I called and you wouldn’t listen, Rat- and
everything came back to me with a rush- and I wanted it!- O dear, O dear!- and when
you wouldn’t turn back, Ratty- and I had to leave it, though I was smelling it all the
time- I thought my heart would break.We might have just gone and had one look at it,
Ratty- only one look- it was close by- but you wouldn’t turn back, Ratty, you wouldn’t
turn back! O dear, O dear!’
Recollection brought fresh waves of sorrow, and sobs again took full charge of him,
preventing further speech.
The Rat stared straight in front of him, saying nothing, only patting Mole gently on the
shoulder. After a time he muttered gloomily, ‘I see it all now! What a pig I have been!
A pig- that’s me! just a pig- a plain pig!’ He waited till Mole’s sobs became gradually
less stormy and more rhythmical; he waited till at last sniffs were frequent and sobs
only intermittent. Then he rose from his seat, and, remarking carelessly, ‘Well, now
we’d really better be getting on, old chap!’ set off up the road again, over the toilsome
way they had come.
‘Wherever are you (hic) going to (hic), Ratty?’ cried the tearful Mole, looking up in
alarm.
‘We’re going to find that home of yours, old fellow,’ replied the Rat pleasantly; ‘so you
had better come along, for it will take some finding, and we shall want your nose.’ ‘Oh,
come back, Ratty, do!’ cried the Mole, getting up and hurrying after him.
‘It’s no good, I tell you! It’s too late, and too dark, and the place is too far off, and the
snow’s coming! And- and I never meant to let you know I was feeling that way about
it- it was all an accident and a mistake! And think of River Bank, and your supper!’
‘Hang River Bank, and supper too!’ said the Rat heartily. ‘I tell you, I’m going to find
this place now, if I stay out all night. So cheer up, old chap, and take my arm, and we’ll
very soon be back there again.’ Still snuffling, pleading, and reluctant, Mole suffered
himself to be dragged back along the road by his imperious companion, who by a flow
of cheerful talk and anecdote endeavoured to beguile his spirits back and make the
weary way seem shorter. When at last it seemed to the Rat that they must be nearing
that part of the road where the Mole had been ‘held up,’ he said, ‘Now, no more
talking. Business! Use your nose, and give your mind to it.’ They moved on in silence
for some little way, when suddenly the Rat was conscious, through his arm that was
linked in Mole’s, of a faint sort of electric thrill that was passing down that animal’s
body. Instantly he disengaged himself, fell back a pace, and waited, all attention.
The signals were coming through!
Mole stood a moment rigid, while his uplifted nose, quivering slightly, felt the air.
Then a short, quick run forward- a fault- a check- a try back; and then a slow, steady,
confident advance.
The Rat, much excited, kept close to his heels as the Mole, with something of the air of a
sleep-walker, crossed a dry ditch, scrambled through a hedge, and nosed his way over
a field open and trackless and bare in the faint starlight.
Suddenly, without giving warning, he dived; but the Rat was on the alert, and
promptly followed him down the tunnel to which his unerring nose had faithfully led
him.
It was close and airless, and the earthy smell was strong, and it seemed a long time to
Rat ere the passage ended and he could stand erect and stretch and shake himself. The
Mole struck a match, and by its light the Rat saw that they were standing in an open
space, neatly swept and sanded underfoot, and directly facing them was Mole’s little
front door, with ‘Mole End’ painted, in Gothic lettering, over the bell-pull at the side.
Mole reached down a lantern from a nail on the wall and lit it, and the Rat, looking
round him, saw that they were in a sort of fore-court. A garden-seat stood on one side
of the door, and on the other a roller; for the Mole, who was a tidy animal when at
home, could not stand having his ground kicked up by other animals into little runs
that ended in earth-heaps. On the walls hung wire baskets with ferns in them,
alternating with brackets carrying plaster statuary- Garibaldi, and the infant Samuel,
and Queen Victoria, and other heroes of modern Italy. Down on one side of the forecourt ran a skittle-alley, with benches along it and little wooden tables marked with
rings that hinted at beer-mugs. In the middle was a small round pond containing goldfish and surrounded by a cockle-shell border.
Out of the centre of the pond rose a fanciful erection clothed in more cockleshells and
topped by a large silvered glass ball that reflected everything all wrong and had a very
pleasing effect.
Mole’s face beamed at the sight of all these objects so dear to him, and he hurried Rat
through the door, lit a lamp in the hall, and took one glance round his old home. He
saw the dust lying thick on everything, saw the cheerless, deserted look of the longneglected house, and its narrow, meagre dimensions, its worn and shabby contentsand collapsed again on a hall-chair, his nose to his paws. ‘O Ratty!’ he cried dismally,
‘why ever did I do it? Why did I bring you to this poor, cold little place, on a night like
this, when you might have been at River Bank by this time, toasting your toes before a
blazing fire, with all your own nice things about you!’ The Rat paid no heed to his
doleful self-reproaches. He was running here and there, opening doors, inspecting
rooms and cupboards, and lighting lamps and candles and sticking them up
everywhere. ‘What a capital little house this is!’ he called out cheerily. ‘So compact! So
well planned! Everything here and everything in its place! We’ll make a jolly night of
it. The first thing we want is a good fire; I’ll see to that- I always know where to find
things. So this is the parlour? Splendid! Your own idea, those little sleeping-bunks in
the wall? Capital! Now, I’ll fetch the wood and the coals, and you get a duster, Moleyou’ll find one in the drawer of the kitchen table- and try and smarten things up a bit.
Bustle about, old chap!’ Encouraged by his inspiriting companion, the Mole roused
himself and dusted and polished with energy and heartiness, while the Rat, running to
and fro with armfuls of fuel, soon had a cheerful blaze roaring up the chimney. He
hailed the Mole to come and warm himself; but Mole promptly had another fit of the
blues, dropping down on a couch in dark despair and burying his face in his duster.
‘Rat,’ he moaned, ‘how about your supper, you poor, cold, hungry, weary animal? I’ve
nothing to give you- nothing- not a crumb!’ ‘What a fellow you are for giving in!’ said
the Rat reproachfully. ‘Why, only just now I saw a sardine-opener on the kitchen
dresser, quite distinctly; and everybody knows that means there are sardines about
somewhere in the neighbourhood. Rouse yourself! pull yourself together, and come
with me and forage.’ They went and foraged accordingly, hunting through every
cupboard and turning out every drawer. The result was not so very depressing after all,
though of course it might have been better; a tin of sardines- a box of captain’s biscuits,
nearly full- and a German sausage encased in silver paper.
‘There’s a banquet for you!’ observed the Rat, as he arranged the table. ‘I know some
animals who would give their ears to be sitting down to supper with us to-night!’ ‘No
bread!’ groaned the Mole dolorously; ‘no butter, no-’ ‘No pate de foie gras, no
champagne!’ continued the Rat, grinning. ‘And that reminds me- what’s that little door
at the end of the passage? Your cellar, of course! Every luxury in this house! Just you
wait a minute.’ He made for the cellar-door, and presently reappeared, somewhat
dusty, with a bottle of beer in each paw and another under each arm, ‘Self-indulgent
beggar you seem to be, Mole,’ he observed. ‘Deny yourself nothing. This is really the
jolliest little place I ever was in. Now, wherever did you pick up those prints? Make the
place look so home-like, they do. No wonder you’re so fond of it, Mole. Tell us all
about it, and how you came to make it what it is.
Then, while the Rat busied himself fetching plates, and knives and forks, and mustard
which he mixed in an egg-cup, the Mole, his bosom still heaving with the stress of his
recent emotion, related- somewhat shyly at first, but with more freedom as he warmed
to his subject- how this was planned, and how that was thought out, and how this was
got through a windfall from an aunt, and that was a wonderful find and a bargain, and
this other thing was bought out of laborious savings and a certain amount of ‘going
without.’ His spirits finally quite restored, he must needs go and caress his possessions,
and take a lamp and show off their points to his visitor and expatiate on them, quite
forgetful of the supper they both so much needed; Rat, who was desperately hungry
but strove to conceal it, nodding seriously, examining with a puckered brow, and
saying, ‘wonderful,’ and ‘most remarkable,’ at intervals, when the chance for an
observation was given him.
At last the Rat succeeded in decoying him to the table, and had just got seriously to
work with the sardine-opener when sounds were heard from the forecourt withoutsounds like the scuffling of small feet in the gravel and a confused murmur of tiny
voices, while broken sentences reached them- ‘Now, all in a line hold the lantern up a
bit, Tommy- clear your throats first- no coughing after I say one, two, three.- Where’s
young Bill?- Here, come on, do, we’re all a-waiting-’ ‘What’s up?’ inquired the Rat,
pausing in his labours.
‘I think it must be the field-mice,’ replied the Mole, with a touch of pride in his manner.
‘They go round carol-singing regularly at this time of the year.
They’re quite an institution in these parts. And they never pass me over- they come to
Mole End last of all; and I used to give them hot drinks, and supper too sometimes,
when I could afford it. It will be like old times to hear them again.’ ‘Let’s have a look at
them!’ cried the Rat, jumping up and running to the door.
It was a pretty sight, and a seasonable one, that met their eyes when they flung the door
open. In the fore-court, lit by the dim rays of a horn lantern, some eight or ten little
field-mice stood in a semicircle, red worsted comforters round their throats, their forepaws thrust deep into their pockets, their feet jigging for warmth. With bright beady
eyes they glanced shyly at each other, sniggering a little, sniffing and applying coatsleeves a good deal. As the door opened, one of the elder ones that carried the lantern
was just saying, ‘Now then, one, two, three!’ and forthwith their shrill little voices
uprose on the air, singing one of the oldtime carols that their forefathers composed in
fields that were fallow and held by frost, or when snow-bound in chimney corners, and
handed down to be sung in the miry street to lamp-lit windows at Yule-time. -
CAROL
Villagers all, this frosty tide, Let your doors swing open wide, Though wind my follow,
and snow beside, Yet draw us in by your fire to bide; Joy shall be yours in the morning!
Here we stand in the cold and the sleet, Blowing fingers and stamping feet, Come from
far away you to greet You by the fire and we in the streetBidding you joy in the
morning!
For ere one half of the night was gone, Sudden a star has led us on, Raining bliss and
benison Bliss to-morrow and more anon, Joy for every morning!
Goodman Joseph toiled through the snow Saw the star o’er a stable low; Mary she
might not further go Welcome thatch, and litter below!
Joy was hers in the morning!And then they heard the angels tell ‘Who were the first to
cry Nowell?
Animals all, as it befell, In the stable were they did dwell! Joy shall be theirs in the
morning!’
The voices ceased, the singers, bashful but smiling, exchanged sidelong glances, and
silence succeeded- but for a moment only. Then, from up above and far away, down
the tunnel they had so lately travelled was borne to their ears in a faint musical hum
the sound of distant bells ringing a joyful and clangorous peal.
‘Very well sung, boys!’ cried the Rat heartily. ‘And now come along in, all of you, and
warm yourselves by the fire, and have something hot!’ ‘Yes, come along, field-mice,’
cried the Mole eagerly. ‘This is quite like old times! Shut the door after you. Pull up
that settle to the fire. Now, you just wait a minute, while we- O, Ratty!’ he cried in
despair, plumping down on a seat, with tears impending. ‘Whatever are we doing?
We’ve nothing to give them!’ ‘You leave all that to me,’ said the masterful Rat. ‘Here,
you with the lantern! Come over this way. I want to talk to you. Now, tell me, are there
any shops open at this hour of the night?’ ‘Why, certainly, sir,’ replied the field-mouse
respectfully. ‘At this time of the year our shops keep open to all sorts of hours.’ ‘Then
look here!’ said the Rat.
‘You go off at once, you and your lantern, and you get me-’ Here much muttered
conversation ensued, and the Mole only heard bits of it, such as- ‘Fresh, mind!- no, a
pound of that will do- see you get Buggins’s, for I won’t have any other- no, only the
best- if you can’t get it there, try somewhere else- yes, of course, home-made, no tinned
stuff- well then, do the best you can!’ Finally, there was a chink of coin passing from
paw to paw, the field-mouse was provided with an ample basket for his purchases, and
off he hurried, he and his lantern.
The rest of the field-mice, perched in a row on the settle, their small legs swinging,
gave themselves up to enjoyment of the fire, and toasted their chilblains till they
tingled; while the Mole, failing to draw them into easy conversation, plunged into
family history and made each of them recite the names of his numerous brothers, who
were too young, it appeared, to be allowed to go out acarolling this year, but looked
forward very shortly to winning the parental consent.
The Rat, meanwhile, was busy examining the label on one of the beer-bottles.
‘I perceive this to be Old Burton,’ he remarked approvingly. ‘Sensible Mole! The very
thing! Now we shall be able to mull some ale! Get the things ready, Mole, while I draw
the corks.’ It did not take long to prepare the brew and thrust the tin heater well into
the red heart of the fire; and soon every field-mouse was sipping and coughing and
choking (for a little mulled ale goes a long way) and wiping his eyes and laughing and
forgetting he had ever been cold in all his life.
‘They act plays too, these fellows,’ the Mole explained to the Rat. ‘Make them up all by
themselves, and act them afterwards. And very well they do it, too! They gave us a
capital one last year, about a field-mouse who was captured at sea by a Barbary corsair,
and made to row in a galley; and when he escaped and got home again, his lady-love
had gone into a convent. Here, you! You were in it, I remember. Get up and recite a bit.’
The field-mouse addressed got up on his legs, giggled shyly, looked round the room,
and remained absolutely tongue-tied. His comrades cheered him on, Mole coaxed and
encouraged him, and the Rat went so far as to take him by the shoulders and shake
him; but nothing could overcome his stage-fright. They were all busily engaged on him
like watermen applying the Royal Humane Society’s regulations to a case of long
submersion, when the latch clicked, the door opened, and the field-mouse with the
lantern reappeared, staggering under the weight of his basket.
There was no more talk of play-acting once the very real and solid contents of the
basket had been tumbled out on the table. Under the generalship of Rat, everybody was
set to do something or to fetch something. In a very few minutes supper was ready, and
Mole, as he took the head of the table in a sort of a dream, saw a lately barren board set
thick with savoury comforts; saw his little friends’ faces brighten and beam as they fell
to without delay; and then let himself loose- for he was famished indeed- on the
provender so magically provided, thinking what a happy home- coming this had
turned out, after all. As they ate, they talked of old times, and the field-mice gave him
the local gossip up to date, and answered as well as they could the hundred questions
he had to ask them. The Rat said little or nothing, only taking care that each guest had
what he wanted, and plenty of it, and that Mole had no trouble or anxiety about
anything.
They clattered off at last, very grateful and showering wishes of the season, with their
jacket pockets stuffed with remembrances for the small brothers and sisters at home.
When the door had closed on the last of them and the chink of the lanterns had died
away, Mole and Rat kicked the fire up, drew their chairs in, brewed themselves a last
nightcap of mulled ale, and discussed the events of the long day. At last the Rat, with a
tremendous yawn, said, ‘Mole, old chap, I’m ready to drop. Sleepy is simply not the
word. That your own bunk over on that side? Very well, then, I’ll take this. What a
ripping little house this is! Everything so handy!’
He clambered into his bunk and rolled himself well up in the blankets, and slumber
gathered him forthwith, as a swathe of barley is folded into the arms of the reaping
machine.
The weary Mole also was glad to turn in without delay, and soon had his head on his
pillow, in great joy and contentment. But ere he closed his eyes he let them wander
round his old room, mellow in the glow of the firelight that played or rested on
familiar and friendly things which had long been unconsciously a part of him, and now
smilingly received him back, without rancour. He was now in just the frame of mind
that the tactful Rat had quietly worked to bring about in him. He saw clearly how plain
and simple- how narrow, even- it all was; but clearly, too, how much it all meant to
him, and the special value of some such anchorage in one’s existence. He did not at all
want to abandon the new life and its splendid spaces, to turn his back on sun and air
and all they offered him and creep home and stay there; the upper world was all too
strong, it called to him still, even down there, and he knew he must return to the larger
stage. But it was good to think he had this to come back to, this place which was all his
own, these things which were so glad to see him again and could always be counted
upon for the same simple welcome.
IT was a bright morning in the early part of summer; the river had resumed its wonted
banks and its accustomed pace, and a hot sun seemed to be pulling everything green
and bushy and spiky up out of the earth towards him, as if by strings.
The Mole and the Water Rat had been up since dawn, very busy on matters connected
with boats and the opening of the boating season; painting and varnishing, mending
paddles, repairing cushions, hunting for missing boat-hooks, and so on; and were
finishing breakfast in their little parlour and eagerly discussing their plans for the day,
when a heavy knock sounded at the door.
‘Bother!’ said the Rat, all over egg. ‘See who it is, Mole, like a good chap, since you’ve
finished.’ The Mole went to attend the summons, and the Rat heard him utter a cry of
surprise. Then he flung the parlour door open, and announced with much importance,
‘Mr. Badger!’ This was a wonderful thing, indeed, that the Badger should pay a formal
call on them, or indeed on anybody. He generally had to be caught, if you wanted him
badly, as he slipped quietly along a hedgerow of an early morning or a late evening, or
else hunted up in his own house in the middle of the Wood, which was a serious
undertaking.
The Badger strode heavily into the room, and stood looking at the two animals with an
expression full of seriousness. The Rat let his egg-spoon fall on the table-cloth, and sat
open-mouthed.
‘The hour has come!’ said the Badger at last with great solemnity.
‘What hour?’ asked the Rat uneasily, glancing at the clock on the mantelpiece.
‘Whose hour, you should rather say,’ replied the Badger. ‘Why, Toad’s hour! The hour
of Toad! I said I would take him in hand as soon as the winter was well over, and I’m
going to take him in hand to-day!’ ‘Toad’s hour, of course!’ cried the Mole delightedly.
‘Hooray! I remember now! We’ll teach him to be a sensible Toad!’ ‘This very morning,’
continued the Badger, taking an arm-chair, ‘as I learnt last night from a trustworthy
source, another new and exceptionally powerful motor-car will arrive at Toad Hall on
approval or return. At this very moment, perhaps, Toad is busy arraying himself in
those singularly hideous habiliments so dear to him, which transform him from a
(comparatively) good-looking Toad into an Object which throws any decent-minded
animal that comes across it into a violent fit. We must be up and doing, ere it is too late.
You two animals will accompany me instantly to Toad Hall, and the work of rescue
shall be accomplished.’
‘Right you are!’ cried the Rat, starting up. ‘We’ll rescue the poor unhappy animal! We’ll
convert him! He’ll be the most converted Toad that ever was before we’ve done with
him!’ They set off up the road on their mission of mercy, Badger leading the way.
Animals when in company walk in a proper and sensible manner, in single file, instead
of sprawling all across the road and being of no use or support to each other in case of
sudden trouble or danger.
They reached the carriage-drive of Toad Hall to find, as the Badger had anticipated, a
shiny new motor-car, of great size, painted a bright red (Toad’s favourite colour),
standing in front of the house. As they neared the door it was flung open, and Mr.
Toad, arrayed in goggles, cap, gaiters, and enormous overcoat, came swaggering down
the steps, drawing on his gauntleted gloves.
‘Hullo! come on, you fellows!’ he cried cheerfully on catching sight of them.
‘You’re just in time to come with me for a jolly- to come for a jolly- for a- erjolly-’ His
hearty accents faltered and fell away as he noticed the stern unbending look on the
countenances of his silent friends, and his invitation remained unfinished.
The Badger strode up the steps. ‘Take him inside,’ he said sternly to his companions.
Then, as Toad was hustled through the door, struggling and protesting, he turned to
the chauffeur in charge of the new motor-car.
‘I’m afraid you won’t be wanted to-day,’ he said. ‘Mr. Toad has changed his mind. He
will not require the car. Please understand that this is final. You needn’t wait.’ Then he
followed the others inside and shut the door.
‘Now then!’ he said to the Toad, when the four of them stood together in the Hall, ‘first
of all, take those ridiculous things off!’ ‘Shan’t!’ replied Toad, with great spirit. ‘What is
the meaning of this gross outrage? I demand an instant explanation.’ ‘Take them off
him, then, you two,’ ordered the Badger briefly.
They had to lay Toad out on the floor, kicking and calling all sorts of names, before
they could get to work properly. Then the Rat sat on him, and the Mole got his motorclothes off him bit by bit, and they stood him up on his legs again. A good deal of his
blustering spirit seemed to have evaporated with the removal of his fine panoply. Now
that he was merely Toad, and no longer the Terror of the Highway, he giggled feebly
and looked from one to the other appealingly, seeming quite to understand the
situation.
‘You knew it must come to this, sooner or later, Toad,’ the Badger explained severely.
‘You’ve disregarded all the warnings we’ve given you, you’ve gone on squandering the
money your father left you, and you’re getting us animals a bad name in the district by
your furious driving and your smashes and your rows with the police. Independence is
all very well, but we animals never allow our friends to make fools of themselves
beyond a certain limit; and that limit you’ve reached.
Now, you’re a good fellow in many respects, and I don’t want to be too hard on you.
I’ll make one more effort to bring you to reason. You will come with me into the
smoking-room, and there you will hear some facts about yourself; and we’ll see
whether you come out of that room the same Toad that you went in.’ He took Toad
firmly by the arm, led him into the smoking-room, and closed the door behind them.
‘That’s no good!’ said the Rat contemptuously. ‘Talking to Toad’ll never cure him. He’ll
say anything.’ They made themselves comfortable in armchairs and waited patiently.
Through the closed door they could just hear the long continuous drone of the Badger’s
voice, rising and falling in waves of oratory; and presently they noticed that the sermon
began to be punctuated at intervals by long-drawn sobs, evidently proceeding from the
bosom of Toad, who was a soft-hearted and affectionate fellow, very easily convertedfor the time being- to any point of view.
After some three-quarters of an hour the door opened, and the Badger reappeared,
solemnly leading by the paw a very limp and dejected Toad. His skin hung baggily
about him, his legs wobbled, and his cheeks were furrowed by the tears so plentifully
called forth by the Badger’s moving discourse.
‘Sit down there, Toad,’ said the Badger kindly, pointing to a chair. ‘My friends,’ he
went on, ‘I am pleased to inform you that Toad has at last seen the error of his ways.
He is truly sorry for his misguided conduct in the past, and he has undertaken to give
up motor-cars entirely and for ever. I have his solemn promise to that effect.’ ‘That is
very good news,’ said the Mole gravely.
‘Very good news indeed,’ observed the Rat dubiously, ‘if only- if only-’ He was looking
very hard at Toad as he said this, and could not help thinking he perceived something
vaguely resembling a twinkle in that animal’s still sorrowful eye.
‘There’s only one thing more to be done,’ continued the gratified Badger.
‘Toad, I want you solemnly to repeat, before your friends here, what you fully
admitted to me in the smoking-room just now. First, you are sorry for what you’ve
done, and you see the folly of it all?’ There was a long, long pause. Toad looked
desperately this way and that, while the other animals waited in grave silence. At last
he spoke.
‘No!’ he said, a little sullenly, but stoutly; ‘I’m not sorry. And it wasn’t folly at all! It
was simply glorious!’ ‘What?’ cried the Badger, greatly scandalised. ‘You backsliding
animal, didn’t you tell me just now, in there-’ ‘Oh, yes, yes, in there,’ said Toad
impatiently. ‘I’d have said anything in there. You’re so eloquent, dear Badger, and so
moving, and so convincing, and put all your points so frightfully well- you can do what
you like with me in there, and you know it. But I’ve been searching my mind since, and
going over things in it, and I find that I’m not a bit sorry or repentant really, so it’s no
earthly good saying I am; now, is it?’ ‘Then you don’t promise,’ said the Badger, ‘never
to touch a motor-car again?’ ‘Certainly not!’ replied Toad emphatically. ‘On the
contrary, I faithfully promise that the very first motor-car I see, poop-poop! off I go in
it!’ ‘Told you so, didn’t I?’ observed the Rat to the Mole.
‘Very well, then,’ said the Badger firmly, rising to his feet. ‘Since you won’t yield to
persuasion, we’ll try what force can do. I feared it would come to this all along. You’ve
often asked us three to come and stay with you, Toad, in this handsome house of yours;
well, now we’re going to. When we’ve converted you to a proper point of view we may
quit, but not before. Take him upstairs, you two, and lock him up in his bedroom,
while we arrange matters between ourselves.’ ‘It’s for your own good, Toady, you
know,’ said the Rat kindly, as Toad, kicking and struggling, was hauled up the stairs
by his two faithful friends. ‘Think what fun we shall all have together, just as we used
to, when you’ve quite got over this- this painful attack of yours!’ ‘We’ll take great care
of everything for you till you’re well, Toad,’ said the Mole; ‘and we’ll see your money
isn’t wasted, as it has been.’ ‘No more of those regrettable incidents with the police,
Toad,’ said the Rat, as they thrust him into his bedroom.
‘And no more weeks in hospital, being ordered about by female nurses, Toad,’ added
the Mole, turning the key on him.
They descended the stair, Toad shouting abuse at them through the keyhole; and the
three friends then met in conference on the situation.
‘It’s going to be a tedious business,’ said the Badger, sighing. ‘I’ve never seen Toad so
determined. However, we will see it out. He must never be left an instant unguarded.
We shall have to take it in turns to be with him, till the poison has worked itself out of
his system.’ They arranged watches accordingly. Each animal took it in turns to sleep in
Toad’s room at night, and they divided the day up between them. At first Toad was
undoubtedly very trying to his careful guardians. When his violent paroxysms
possessed him he would arrange bedroom chairs in rude resemblance of a motor-car
and would crouch on the foremost of them, bent forward and staring fixedly ahead,
making uncouth and ghastly noises, till the climax was reached, when, turning a
complete somersault, he would lie prostrate amidst the ruins of the chairs, apparently
completely satisfied for the moment. As time passed, however, these painful seizures
grew gradually less frequent, and his friends strove to divert his mind into fresh
channels. But his interest in other matters did not seem to revive, and he grew
apparently languid and depressed.
One fine morning the Rat, whose turn it was to go on duty, went upstairs to relieve
Badger, whom he found fidgeting to be off and stretch his legs in a long ramble round
his wood and down his earths and burrows. ‘Toad’s still in bed,’ he told the Rat,
outside the door. ‘Can’t get much out of him, except, “O leave him alone, he wants
nothing, perhaps he’ll be better presently, it may pass off in time, don’t be unduly
anxious,” and so on. Now, you look out, Rat! When Toad’s quiet and submissive, and
playing at being the hero of a Sunday-school prize, then he’s at his artfullest. There’s
sure to be something up. I know him. Well, now, I must be off.’ ‘How are you to-day,
old chap? inquired the Rat cheerfully, as he approached Toad’s bedside.
He had to wait some minutes for an answer. At last a feeble voice replied, ‘Thank you
so much, dear Ratty! So good of you to inquire! But first tell me how you are yourself,
and the excellent Mole? ‘O, we’re all right,’ replied the Rat. ‘Mole,’ he added
incautiously, ‘is going out for a run round with Badger. They’ll be out till luncheon
time, so you and I will spend a pleasant morning together, and I’ll do my best to amuse
you. Now jump up, there’s a good fellow, and don’t lie moping there on a fine morning
like this!’ ‘Dear, kind Rat,’ murmured Toad, ‘how little you realise my condition, and
how very far I am from “jumping up” now- if ever! But do not trouble about me.
I hate being a burden to my friends, and I do not expect to be one much longer. Indeed,
I almost hope not.’ ‘Well, I hope not, too,’ said the Rat heartily. ‘You’ve been a fine
bother to us all this time, and I’m glad to hear it’s going to stop. And in weather like
this, and the boating season just beginning! It’s too bad of you, Toad! It isn’t the trouble
we mind, but you’re making us miss such an awful lot.’ ‘I’m afraid it is the trouble you
mind, though,’ replied the Toad languidly. ‘I can quite understand it. It’s natural
enough. You’re tired of bothering about me. I mustn’t ask you to do anything further.
I’m a nuisance, I know.’ ‘You are, indeed,’ said the Rat. ‘But I tell you, I’d take any
trouble on earth for you, if only you’d be a sensible animal.’ ‘If I thought that, Ratty,’
murmured Toad, more feebly than ever, ‘then I would beg you- for the last time,
probably- to step round to the village as quickly as possible- even now it may be too
late- and fetch the doctor. But don’t you bother. It’s only a trouble, and perhaps we
may as well let things take their course.’ ‘Why, what do you want a doctor for?’
inquired the Rat, coming closer and examining him. He certainly lay very still and flat,
and his voice was weaker and his manner much changed.
‘Surely you have noticed of late-’ murmured Toad. ‘But, no- why should you? Noticing
things is only a trouble. To-morrow, indeed, you may be saying to yourself, “O, if only
I had noticed sooner! If only I had done something!” But no; it’s a trouble. Never mindforget that I asked.’
‘Look here, old man,’ said the Rat, beginning to get rather alarmed, ‘of course I’ll fetch
a doctor to you, if you really think you want him. But you can hardly be bad enough
for that yet. Let’s talk about something else.’ ‘I fear, dear friend,’ said Toad, with a sad
smile, ‘that “talk” can do little in a case like this- or doctors either, for that matter; still,
one must grasp at the slightest straw. And, by the way- while you are about it- I hate to
give you additional trouble, but I happen to remember that you will pass the doorwould you mind at the same time asking the lawyer to step up? It would be a
convenience to me, and there are moments- perhaps I should say there is a momentwhen one must face disagreeable tasks, at whatever cost to exhausted nature ‘A lawyer!
O, he must be really bad!’ the affrighted Rat said to himself, as he hurried from the
room, not forgetting, however, to lock the door carefully behind him.
Outside, he stopped to consider. The other two were far away, and he had no one to
consult.
‘It’s best to be on the safe side,’ he said, on reflection. ‘I’ve known Toad fancy himself
frightfully bad before, without the slightest reason; but I’ve never heard him ask for a
lawyer! If there’s nothing really the matter, the doctor will tell him he’s an old ass, and
cheer him up; and that will be something gained. I’d better humour him and go; it
won’t take very long.’ So he ran off to the village on his errand of mercy.
The Toad, who had hopped lightly out of bed as soon as he heard the key turned in the
lock, watched him eagerly from the window till he disappeared down the carriagedrive. Then, laughing heartily, he dressed as quickly as possible in the smartest suit he
could lay hands on at the moment, filled his pockets with cash which he took from a
small drawer in the dressing-table, and next, knotting the sheets from his bed together
and tying one end of the improvised rope round the central mullion of the handsome
Tudor window which formed such a feature of his bedroom, he scrambled out, slid
lightly to the ground, and, taking the opposite direction to the Rat, marched off
lightheartedly, whistling a merry tune.
It was a gloomy luncheon for Rat when the Badger and the Mole at length returned,
and he had to face them at table with his pitiful and unconvincing story.
The Badger’s caustic, not to say brutal, remarks may be imagined, and therefore passed
over; but it was painful to the Rat that even the Mole, though he took his friend’s side
as far as possible, could not help saying, ‘You’ve been a bit of a duffer this time, Ratty!
Toad, too, of all animals!’ ‘He did it awfully well,’ said the crestfallen Rat.
‘He did you awfully well!’ rejoined the Badger hotly. ‘However, talking won’t mend
matters. He’s got clear away for the time, that’s certain; and the worst of it is, he’ll be so
conceited with what he’ll think is his cleverness that he may commit any folly. One
comfort is, we’re free now, and needn’t waste any more of our precious time doing
sentry-go. But we’d better continue to sleep at Toad Hall for a while longer. Toad may
be brought back at any moment- on a stretcher, or between two policemen.’ So spoke
the Badger, not knowing what the future held in store, or how much water, and of how
turbid a character, was to run under bridges before Toad should sit at ease again in his
ancestral Hall. Meanwhile, Toad, gay and irresponsible, was walking briskly along the
high road, some miles from home. At first he had taken by-paths, and crossed many
fields, and changed his course several times, in case of pursuit; but now, feeling by this
time safe from recapture, and the sun smiling brightly on him, and all Nature joining in
a chorus of approval to the song of self-praise that his own heart was singing to him, he
almost danced along the road in his satisfaction and conceit.
‘Smart piece of work that!’ he remarked to himself chuckling. ‘Brain against brute forceand brain came out on the top- as it’s bound to do. Poor old Ratty! My! won’t he catch it
when the Badger gets back! A worthy fellow, Ratty, with many good qualities, but very
little intelligence and absolutely no education. I must take him in hand some day, and
see if I can make something of him.’ Filled full of conceited thoughts such as these he
strode along, his head in the air, till he reached a little town, where the sign of ‘The Red
Lion,’ swinging across the road halfway down the main street, reminded him that he
had not breakfasted that day, and that he was exceedingly hungry after his long walk.
He marched into the Inn, ordered the best luncheon that could be provided at so short a
notice, and sat down to eat it in the coffee-room.
He was about half-way through his meal when an only too familiar sound,
approaching down the street, made him start and fall a-trembling all over. The
pooppoop! drew nearer and nearer, the car could be heard to turn into the inn-yard
and come to a stop, and Toad had to hold on to the leg of the table to conceal his
overmastering emotion. Presently the party entered the coffee-room, hungry, talkative,
and gay, voluble on their experiences of the morning and the merits of the chariot that
had brought them along so well. Toad listened eagerly, all ears, for a time; at last he
could stand it no longer. He slipped out of the room quietly, paid his bill at the bar, and
as soon as he got outside sauntered round quietly to the inn-yard.
‘There cannot be any harm,’ he said to himself, ‘in my only just looking at it!’ The car
stood in the middle of the yard, quite unattended, the stable-helps and other hangerson being all at their dinner. Toad walked slowly round it, inspecting, criticising,
musing deeply.
‘I wonder,’ he said to himself presently, ‘I wonder if this sort of car starts easily?’ Next
moment, hardly knowing how it came about, he found he had hold of the handle and
was turning it. As the familiar sound broke forth, the old passion seized on Toad and
completely mastered him, body and soul. As if in a dream he found himself, somehow,
seated in the driver’s seat; as if in a dream, he pulled the lever and swung the car round
the yard and out through the archway; and, as if in a dream, all sense of right and
wrong, all fear of obvious consequences, seemed temporarily suspended. He increased
his pace, and as the car devoured the street and leapt forth on the high road through
the open country, he was only conscious that he was Toad once more, Toad at his best
and highest, Toad the terror, the traffic-queller, the Lord of the lone trail, before whom
all must give way or be smitten into nothingness and everlasting night. He chanted as
he flew, and the car responded with sonorous drone; the miles were eaten up under
him as he sped he knew not whither, fulfilling his instincts, living his hour, reckless of
what might come to him. ‘To my mind,’ observed the Chairman of the Bench of
Magistrates cheerfully, ‘the only difficulty that presents itself in this otherwise very
clear case is, how we can possibly make it sufficiently hot for the incorrigible rogue and
hardened ruffian whom we see cowering in the dock before us. Let me see: he has been
found guilty, on the clearest evidence, first, of stealing a valuable motor-car; secondly,
of driving to the public danger; and, thirdly, of gross impertinence to the rural police.
Mr. Clerk, will you tell us, please, what is the very stiffest penalty we can impose for
each of these offences? Without, of course, giving the prisoner the benefit of any doubt,
because there isn’t any.’ The Clerk scratched his nose with his pen. ‘Some people would
consider,’ he observed, ‘that stealing the motor-car was the worst offence; and so it is.
But cheeking the police undoubtedly carries the severest penalty; and so it ought.
Supposing you were to say twelve months for the theft, which is mild; and three years
for the furious driving, which is lenient; and fifteen years for the cheek, which was
pretty bad sort of cheek, judging by what we’ve heard from the witness-box, even if
you only believe one-tenth part of what you heard, and I never believe more myselfthose figures, if added together correctly, tot up to nineteen years-’ ‘First-rate!’ said the
Chairman.
‘-So you had better make it a round twenty years and be on the safe side,’ concluded
the Clerk.
‘An excellent suggestion!’ said the Chairman approvingly. ‘Prisoner! Pull yourself
together and try and stand up straight. It’s going to be twenty years for you this time.
And mind, if you appear before us again, upon any charge whatever, we shall have to
deal with you very seriously!’ Then the brutal minions of the law fell upon the hapless
Toad; loaded him with chains, and dragged him from the Court House, shrieking,
praying, protesting; across the market-place, where the playful populace, always as
severe upon detected crime as they are sympathetic and helpful when one is merely
‘wanted,’ assailed him with jeers, carrots, and popular catch-words; past hooting school
children, their innocent faces lit up with the pleasure they ever derive from the sight of
a gentleman in difficulties; across the hollow-sounding drawbridge, below the spiky
portcullis, under the frowning archway of the grim old castle, whose ancient towers
soared high overhead; past guardrooms full of grinning soldiery off duty, past sentries
who coughed in a horrid, sarcastic way, because that is as much as a sentry on his post
dare do to show his contempt and abhorrence of crime; up time-worn winding stairs,
past men-at-arms in casquet and corselet of steel, darting threatening looks through
their vizards; across courtyards, where mastiffs strained at their leash and pawed the
air to get at him; past ancient warders, their halberds leant against the wall, dozing
over a pasty and a flagon of brown ale; on and on, past the rack-chamber and the
thumbscrew-room, past the turning that led to the private scaffold, till they reached the
door of the grimmest dungeon that lay in the heart of the innermost keep. There at last
they paused, where an ancient gaoler sat fingering a bunch of mighty keys.
‘Oddsbodikins!’ said the sergeant of police, taking off his helmet and wiping his
forehead. ‘Rouse thee, old loon, and take over from us this vile Toad, a criminal of
deepest guilt and matchless artfulness and resource. Watch and ward him with all thy
skill; and mark thee well, greybeard, should aught untoward befall, thy old head shall
answer for his- and a murrain on both of them!’ The gaoler nodded grimly, laying his
withered hand on the shoulder of the miserable Toad. The rusty key creaked in the
lock, the great door clanged behind them; and Toad was a helpless prisoner in the
remotest dungeon of the bestguarded keep of the stoutest castle in all the length and
breadth of Merry England.
THE Willow-Wren was twittering his thin little song, hidden himself in the dark
selvedge of the river bank. Though it was past ten o’clock at night, the sky still clung to
and retained some lingering skirts of light from the departed day; and the sullen heats
of the torrid afternoon broke up and rolled away at the dispersing touch of the cool
fingers of the short midsummer night. Mole lay stretched on the bank, still panting
from the stress of the fierce day that had been cloudless from dawn to late sunset, and
waited for his friend to return. He had been on the river with some companions,
leaving the Water Rat free to keep an engagement of long standing with Otter; and he
had come back to find the house dark and deserted, and no sign of Rat, who was
doubtless keeping it up late with his old comrade. It was still too hot to think of staying
indoors, so he lay on some cool dock-leaves, and thought over the past day and its
doings, and how very good they all had been.
The Rat’s light footfall was presently heard approaching over the parched grass. ‘O, the
blessed coolness!’ he said, and sat down, gazing thoughtfully into the river, silent and
pre-occupied.
‘You stayed to supper, of course?’ said the Mole presently.
‘Simply had to,’ said the Rat. ‘They wouldn’t hear of my going before. You know how
kind they always are. And they made things as jolly for me as ever they could, right up
to the moment I left. But I felt a brute all the time, as it was clear to me they were very
unhappy, though they tried to hide it. Mole, I’m afraid they’re in trouble. Little Portly
is missing again; and you know what a lot his father thinks of him, though he never
says much about it.’ ‘What, that child?’ said the Mole lightly. ‘Well, suppose he is; why
worry about it? He’s always straying off and getting lost, and turning up again; he’s so
adventurous. But no harm ever happens to him. Everybody here-abouts knows him
and likes him, just as they do old Otter, and you may be sure some animal or other will
come across him and bring him back again all right. Why, we’ve found him ourselves,
miles from home, and quite self-possessed and cheerful!’ ‘Yes; but this time it’s more
serious,’ said the Rat gravely. ‘He’s been missing for some days now, and the Otters
have hunted everywhere, high and low, without finding the slightest trace. And
they’ve asked every animal, too, for miles around, and no one knows anything about
him. Otter’s evidently more anxious than he’ll admit. I got out of him that young Portly
hasn’t learnt to swim very well yet, and I can see he’s thinking of the weir. There’s a lot
of water coming down still, considering the time of the year, and the place always had
a fascination for the child. And then there are- well, traps and things- you know. Otter’s
not the fellow to be nervous about any son of his before it’s time. And now he is
nervous. When I left, he came out with me- said he wanted some air, and talked about
stretching his legs. But I could see it wasn’t that, so I drew him out and pumped him,
and got it all from him at last. He was going to spend the night watching by the ford.
You know the place where the old ford used to be, in bygone days before they built the
bridge?’ ‘I know it well,’ said the Mole. ‘But why should Otter choose to watch there?’
‘Well, it seems that it was there he gave Portly his first swimming-lesson,’ continued
the Rat. ‘From that shallow, gravelly spit near the bank. And it was there he used to
teach him fishing, and there young Portly caught his first fish, of which he was so very
proud. The child loved the spot, and Otter thinks that if he came wandering back from
wherever he is- if he is anywhere by this time, poor little chap- he might make for the
ford he was so fond of; or if he came across it he’d remember it well, and stop there and
play, perhaps. So Otter goes there every night and watches- on the chance, you know,
just on the chance!’ They were silent for a time, both thinking of the same thing- the
lonely, heartsore animal, crouched by the ford, watching and waiting, the long night
throughon the chance.
‘Well, well,’ said the Rat presently, ‘I suppose we ought to be thinking about turning
in.’ But he never offered to move.
‘Rat,’ said the Mole, ‘I simply can’t go and turn in, and go to sleep, and do nothing,
even though there doesn’t seem to be anything to be done. We’ll get the boat out, and
paddle up stream. The moon will be up in an hour or so, and then we will search as
well as we can- anyhow, it will be better than going to bed and doing nothing.’ ‘Just
what I was thinking myself,’ said the Rat. ‘It’s not the sort of night for bed anyhow; and
daybreak is not so very far off, and then we may pick up some news of him from early
risers as we go along.’ They got the boat out, and the Rat took the sculls, paddling with
caution. Out in midstream, there was a clear, narrow track that faintly reflected the sky;
but wherever shadows fell on the water from bank, bush, or tree, they were as solid to
all appearance as the banks themselves, and the Mole had to steer with judgment
accordingly. Dark and deserted as it was, the night was full of small noises, song and
chatter and rustling, telling of the busy little population who were up and about, plying
their trades and vocations through the night till sunshine should fall on them at last
and send them off to their well-earned repose. The water’s own noises, too, were more
apparent than by day, its gurglings and ‘cloops’ more unexpected and near at hand;
and constantly they started at what seemed a sudden clear call from an actual articulate
voice.
The line of the horizon was clear and hard against the sky, and in one particular
quarter it showed black against a silvery climbing phosphorescence that grew and
grew. At last, over the rim of the waiting earth the moon lifted with slow majesty till it
swung clear of the horizon and rode off, free of moorings; and once more they began to
see surfaces- meadows wide-spread, and quiet gardens, and the river itself from bank
to bank, all softly disclosed, all washed clean of mystery and terror, all radiant again as
by day, but with a difference that was tremendous.
Their old haunts greeted them again in other raiment, as if they had slipped away and
put on this pure new apparel and come quietly back, smiling as they shyly waited to
see if they would be recognised again under it.
Fastening their boat to a willow, the friends landed in this silent, silver kingdom, and
patiently explored the hedges, the hollow trees, the runnels and their little culverts, the
ditches and dry water-ways. Embarking again and crossing over, they worked their
way up the stream in this manner, while the moon, serene and detached in a cloudless
sky, did what she could, though so far off, to help them in their quest; till her hour
came and she sank earthwards reluctantly, and left them, and mystery once more held
field and river.
Then a change began slowly to declare itself. The horizon became clearer, field and tree
came more into sight, and somehow with a different look; the mystery began to drop
away from them. A bird piped suddenly, and was still; and a light breeze sprang up
and set the reeds and bulrushes rustling. Rat, who was in the stern of the boat, while
Mole sculled, sat up suddenly and listened with a passionate intentness. Mole, who
with gentle strokes was just keeping the boat moving while he scanned the banks with
care, looked at him with curiosity.
‘It’s gone!’ sighed the Rat, sinking back in his seat again. ‘So beautiful and strange and
new! Since it was to end so soon, I almost wish I had never heard it.
For it has roused a longing in me that is pain, and nothing seems worth while but just
to hear that sound once more and go on listening to it for ever. No! There it is again!’ he
cried, alert once more. Entranced, he was silent for a long space, spellbound.
‘Now it passes on and I begin to lose it,’ he said presently. ‘O Mole! the beauty of it!
The merry bubble and joy, the thin, clear, happy call of the distant piping! Such music I
never dreamed of, and the call in it is stronger even than the music is sweet! Row on,
Mole, row! For the music and the call must be for us.’ The Mole, greatly wondering,
obeyed. ‘I hear nothing myself,’ he said, ‘but the wind playing in the reeds and rushes
and osiers.’ The Rat never answered, if indeed he heard. Rapt, transported, trembling,
he was possessed in all his senses by this new divine thing that caught up his helpless
soul and swung and dandled it, a powerless but happy infant in a strong sustaining
grasp.
In silence Mole rowed steadily, and soon they came to a point where the river divided,
a long backwater branching off to one side. With a slight movement of his head Rat,
who had long dropped the rudder-lines, directed the rower to take the backwater. The
creeping tide of light gained and gained, and now they could see the colour of the
flowers that gemmed the water’s edge.
‘Clearer and nearer still,’ cried the Rat joyously. ‘Now you must surely hear it! Ah- at
last- I see you do!’ Breathless and transfixed the Mole stopped rowing as the liquid run
of that glad piping broke on him like a wave, caught him up, and possessed him
utterly.
He saw the tears on his comrade’s cheeks, and bowed his head and understood.
For a space they hung there, brushed by the purple loose-strife that fringed the bank;
then the clear imperious summons that marched hand-in-hand with the intoxicating
melody imposed its will on Mole, and mechanically he bent to his oars again. And the
light grew steadily stronger, but no birds sang as they were wont to do at the approach
of dawn; and but for the heavenly music all was marvellously still.
On either side of them, as they glided onwards, the rich meadow-grass seemed that
morning of a freshness and a greenness unsurpassable. Never had they noticed the
roses so vivid, the willow-herb so riotous, the meadow-sweet so odorous and
pervading. Then the murmur of the approaching weir began to hold the air, and they
felt a consciousness that they were nearing the end, whatever it might be, that surely
awaited their expedition.
A wide half-circle of foam and glinting lights and shining shoulders of green water, the
great weir closed the backwater from bank to bank, troubled all the quiet surface with
twirling eddies and floating foam-streaks, and deadened all other sounds with its
solemn and soothing rumble. In midmost of the stream, embraced in the weir’s
shimmering arm-spread, a small island lay anchored, fringed close with willow and
silver birch and alder. Reserved, shy, but full of significance, it hid whatever it might
hold behind a veil, keeping it till the hour should come, and, with the hour, those who
were called and chosen.
Slowly, but with no doubt or hesitation whatever, and in something of a solemn
expectancy, the two animals passed through the broken, tumultuous water and moored
their boat at the flowery margin of the island. In silence they landed, and pushed
through the blossom and scented herbage and undergrowth that led up to the level
ground, till they stood on a little lawn of a marvellous green, set round with Nature’s
own orchard-trees- crab-apple, wild cherry, and sloe.
‘This is the place of my song-dream, the place the music played to me,’ whispered the
Rat, as if in a trance. ‘Here, in this holy place, here if anywhere, surely we shall find
Him!’ Then suddenly the Mole felt a great Awe fall upon him, an awe that turned his
muscles to water, bowed his head, and rooted his feet to the ground. It was no panic
terror- indeed he felt wonderfully at peace and happy- but it was an awe that smote
and held him and, without seeing, he knew it could only mean that some august
Presence was very, very near. With difficulty he turned to look for his friend, and saw
him at his side cowed, stricken, and trembling violently. And still there was utter
silence in the populous bird-haunted branches around them; and still the light grew
and grew.
Perhaps he would never have dared to raise his eyes, but that, though the piping was
now hushed, the call and the summons seemed still dominant and imperious. He might
not refuse, were Death himself waiting to strike him instantly, once he had looked with
mortal eye on things rightly kept hidden. Trembling he obeyed, and raised his humble
head; and then, in that utter clearness of the imminent dawn, while Nature, flushed
with fulness of incredible colour, seemed to hold her breath for the event, he looked in
the very eyes of the Friend and Helper; saw the backward sweep of the curved horns,
gleaming in the growing daylight; saw the stern, hooked nose between the kindly eyes
that were looking down on them humourously, while the bearded mouth broke into a
half-smile at the corners; saw the rippling muscles on the arm that lay across the broad
chest, the long supple hand still holding the pan-pipes only just fallen away from the
parted lips; saw the splendid curves of the shaggy limbs disposed in majestic ease on
the sward; saw, last of all, nestling between his very hooves, sleeping soundly in entire
peace and contentment, the little, round, podgy, childish form of the baby otter. All this
he saw, for one moment breathless and intense, vivid on the morning sky; and still, as
he looked, he lived; and still, as he lived, he wondered.
‘Rat!’ he found breath to whisper, shaking. ‘Are you afraid?’ ‘Afraid?’ murmured the
Rat, his eyes shining with unutterable love. ‘Afraid! Of Him? O, never, never! And yetand yet- O, Mole, I am afraid!’ Then the two animals, crouching to the earth, bowed
their heads and did worship.
Sudden and magnificent, the sun’s broad golden disc showed itself over the horizon
facing them; and the first rays, shooting across the level water-meadows, took the
animals full in the eyes and dazzled them. When they were able to look once more, the
Vision had vanished, and the air was full of the carol of birds that hailed the dawn.
As they stared blankly, in dumb misery deepening as they slowly realised all they had
seen and all they had lost, a capricious little breeze, dancing up from the surface of the
water, tossed the aspens, shook the dewy roses, and blew lightly and caressingly in
their faces; and with its soft touch came instant oblivion. For this is the last best gift that
the kindly demi-god is careful to bestow on those to whom he has revealed himself in
their helping: the gift of forgetfulness. Lest the awful remembrance should remain and
grow, and overshadow mirth and pleasure, and the great haunting memory should
spoil all the after-lives of little animals helped out of difficulties, in order that they
should be happy and light-hearted as before.
Mole rubbed his eyes and stared at Rat, who was looking about him in a puzzled sort
of way. ‘I beg your pardon; what did you say, Rat?’ he asked.
‘I think I was only remarking,’ said Rat slowly, ‘that this was the right sort of place, and
that here, if anywhere, we should find him. And look! Why, there he is, the little
fellow!’ And with a cry of delight he ran towards the slumbering Portly.
But Mole stood still a moment, held in thought. As one wakened suddenly from a
beautiful dream, who struggles to recall it, and can re-capture nothing but a dim sense
of the beauty of it, the beauty! Till that, too, fades away in its turn, and the dreamer
bitterly accepts the hard, cold waking and all its penalties; so Mole, after struggling
with his memory for a brief space, shook his head sadly and followed the Rat.
Portly woke up with a joyous squeak, and wriggled with pleasure at the sight of his
father’s friends, who had played with him so often in past days. In a moment, however,
his face grew blank, and he fell to hunting round in a circle with pleading whine. As a
child that has fallen happily asleep in its nurse’s arms, and wakes to find itself alone
and laid in a strange place, and searches corners and cupboards, and runs from room to
room, despair growing silently in its heart, even so Portly searched the island and
searched, dogged and unwearying, till at last the black moment came for giving it up,
and sitting down and crying bitterly.
The Mole ran quickly to comfort the little animal; but Rat, lingering, looked long and
doubtfully at certain hoof-marks deep in the sward.
‘Some- great- animal- has been here,’ he murmured slowly and thoughtfully; and stood
musing, musing; his mind strangely stirred.
‘Come along, Rat!’ called the Mole. ‘Think of poor Otter, waiting up there by the ford!’
Portly had soon been comforted by the promise of a treat- a jaunt on the river in Mr.
Rat’s real boat; and the two animals conducted him to the water’s side, placed him
securely between them in the bottom of the boat, and paddled off down the backwater.
The sun was fully up by now, and hot on them, birds sang lustily and without restraint,
and flowers smiled and nodded from either bank, but somehow- so thought the
animals- with less of richness and blaze of colour than they seemed to remember seeing
quite recently somewhere- they wondered where.
The main river reached again, they turned the boat’s head upstream, towards the point
where they knew their friend was keeping his lonely vigil. As they drew near the
familiar ford, the Mole took the boat in to the bank, and they lifted Portly out and set
him on his legs on the tow-path, gave him his marching orders and a friendly farewell
pat on the back, and shoved out into mid-stream. They watched the little animal as he
waddled along the path contentedly and with importance; watched him till they saw
his muzzle suddenly lift and his waddle break into a clumsy amble as he quickened his
pace with shrill whines and wriggles of recognition. Looking up the river, they could
see Otter start up, tense and rigid, from out of the shallows where he crouched in dumb
patience, and could hear his amazed and joyous bark as he bounded up through the
osiers on to the path. Then the Mole, with a strong pull on one oar, swung the boat
round and let the full stream bear them down again whither it would, their quest now
happily ended.
‘I feel strangely tired, Rat,’ said the Mole, leaning wearily over his oars as the boat
drifted. ‘It’s being up all night, you’ll say, perhaps; but that’s nothing. We do as much
half the nights of the week, at this time of the year. No; I feel as if I had been through
something very exciting and rather terrible, and it was just over; and yet nothing
particular has happened.’ ‘Or something very surprising and splendid and beautiful,’
murmured the Rat, leaning back and closing his eyes. ‘I feel just as you do, Mole;
simply dead tired, though not body-tired. It’s lucky we’ve got the stream with us, to
take us home.
Isn’t it jolly to feel the sun again, soaking into one’s bones! And hark to the wind
playing in the reeds!’ ‘It’s like music- far away music,’ said the Mole nodding drowsily.
‘So I was thinking,’ murmured the Rat, dreamful and languid. ‘Dance-musicthe lilting
sort that runs on without a stop- but with words in it, too- it passes into words and out
of them again- I catch them at intervals- then it is dance-music once more, and then
nothing but the reeds’ soft thin whispering.’ ‘You hear better than I,’ said the Mole
sadly. ‘I cannot catch the words.’ ‘Let me try and give you them,’ said the Rat softly, his
eyes still closed. ‘Now it is turning into words again- faint but clear- Lest the awe
should dwell- And turn your frolic to fret- You shall look on my power at the helping
hour- But then you shall forget! Now the reeds take it up- forget, forget, they sigh, and
it dies away in a rustle and a whisper. Then the voice returns‘Lest limbs be reddened
and rent- I spring the trap that is set- As I loose the snare you may glimpse me there-
For surely you shall forget! Row nearer, Mole, nearer to the reeds! It is hard to catch,
and grows each minute fainter.
‘Helper and healer, I cheer- Small waifs in the woodland wet- Strays I find in it,
wounds I bind in it- Bidding them all forget! Nearer, Mole, nearer! No, it is no good;
the song has died away into reed-talk.’ ‘But what do the words mean?’ asked the
wondering Mole.
‘That I do not know,’ said the Rat simply. ‘I passed them on to you as they reached me.
Ah! now they return again, and this time full and clear! This time, at last, it is the real,
the unmistakable thing, simple- passionate- perfect-’ ‘Well, let’s have it, then,’ said the
Mole, after he had waited patiently for a few minutes, half-dozing in the hot sun.
But no answer came. He looked, and understood the silence. With a smile of much
happiness on his face, and something of a listening look still lingering there, the weary
Rat was fast asleep.
WHEN Toad found himself immured in a dank and noisome dungeon, and knew that
all the grim darkness of a medieval fortress lay between him and the outer world of
sunshine and well-metalled high roads where he had lately been so happy, disporting
himself as if he had bought up every road in England, he flung himself at full length on
the floor, and shed bitter tears, and abandoned himself to dark despair. ‘This is the end
of everything’ (he said), ‘at least it is the end of the career of Toad, which is the same
thing; the popular and handsome Toad, the rich and hospitable Toad, the Toad so free
and careless and debonair! How can I hope to be ever set at large again’ (he said), ‘who
have been imprisoned so justly for stealing so handsome a motor-car in such an
audacious manner, and for such lurid and imaginative cheek, bestowed upon such a
number of fat, red-faced policemen!’ (Here his sobs choked him.) ‘Stupid animal that I
was’ (he said), ‘now I must languish in this dungeon, till people who were proud to say
they knew me, have forgotten the very name of Toad! O wise old Badger!’ (he said), ‘O
clever, intelligent Rat and sensible Mole! What sound judgments, what a knowledge of
men and matters you possess! O unhappy and forsaken Toad!’ With lamentations such
as these be passed his days and nights for several weeks, refusing his meals or
intermediate light refreshments, though the grim and ancient gaoler, knowing that
Toad’s pockets were well lined, frequently pointed out that many comforts, and indeed
luxuries, could by arrangement be sent in- at a price- from outside.
Now the gaoler had a daughter, a pleasant wench and good-hearted, who assisted her
father in the lighter duties of his post. She was particularly fond of animals, and,
besides her canary, whose cage hung on a nail in the massive wall of the keep by day,
to the great annoyance of prisoners who relished an after-dinner nap, and was
shrouded in an antimacassar on the parlour table at night, she kept several piebald
mice and a restless revolving squirrel. This kind-hearted girl, pitying the misery of
Toad, said to her father one day, ‘Father! I can’t bear to see that poor beast so unhappy,
and getting so thin! You let me have the managing of him.
You know how fond of animals I am. I’ll make him eat from my hand, and sit up, and
do all sorts of things.’ Her father replied that she could do what she liked with him. He
was tired of Toad, and his sulks and his airs and his meanness. So that day she went on
her errand of mercy, and knocked at the door of Toad’s cell.
‘Now, cheer up, Toad,’ she said, coaxingly, on entering, ‘and sit up and dry your eyes
and be a sensible animal. And do try and eat a bit of dinner. See, I’ve brought you some
of mine, hot from the oven!’ It was bubble-and-squeak, between two plates, and its
fragrance filled the narrow cell. The penetrating smell of cabbage reached the nose of
Toad as he lay prostrate in his misery on the floor, and gave him the idea, for a moment
that perhaps life was not such a blank and desperate thing as he had imagined. But still
he wailed, and kicked with his legs, and refused to be comforted. So the wise girl
retired for the time, but, of course, a good deal of the smell of hot cabbage remained
behind, as it will do, and Toad, between his sobs, sniffed and reflected, and gradually
began to think new and inspiring thoughts: of chivalry, and poetry, and deeds still to
be done; of broad meadows, and cattle browsing in them, raked by sun and wind; of
kitchen-gardens, and straight herb-borders, and warm snapdragon beset by bees; and
of the comforting clink of dishes set down on the table at Toad Hall, and the scrape of
chair-legs on the floor as every one pulled himself close up to his work. The air of the
narrow cell took a rosy tinge; be began to think of his friends, and how they would
surely be able to do something; of lawyers, and how they would have enjoyed his case,
and what an ass he had been not to get in a few; and lastly, he thought of his own great
cleverness and resource, and all that he was capable of if he only gave his great mind to
it; and the cure was almost complete.
When the girl returned, some hours later, she carried a tray, with a cup of fragrant tea
steaming on it; and a plate piled up with very hot buttered toast, cut thick, very brown
on both sides, with the butter running through the holes in it in great golden drops, like
honey from the honeycomb. The smell of that buttered toast simply talked to Toad, and
with no uncertain voice; talked of warm kitchens, of breakfasts on bright frosty
mornings, of cosy parlour firesides on winter evenings, when one’s ramble was over
and slippered feet were propped on the fender; of the purring of contented cats, and
the twitter of sleepy canaries. Toad sat up on end once more, dried his eyes, sipped his
tea and munched his toast, and soon began talking freely about himself, and the house
he lived in, and his doings there, and how important he was, and what a lot his friends
thought of him.
The gaoler’s daughter saw that the topic was doing him as much good as the tea, as
indeed it was, and encouraged him to go on.
‘Tell me about Toad Hall,” said she. ‘It sounds beautiful.’ ‘Toad Hall,’ said the Toad
proudly, ‘is an eligible self-contained gentleman’s residence, very unique; dating in
part from the fourteenth century, but replete with every modern convenience. Up-todate sanitation. Five minutes from church, postoffice, and golf-links, Suitable for-’
‘Bless the animal,’ said the girl, laughing, ‘I don’t want to take it. Tell me something
real about it. But first wait till I fetch you some more tea and toast.’ She tripped away,
and presently returned with a fresh trayful; and Toad, pitching into the toast with
avidity, his spirits quite restored to their usual level, told her about the boat-house, and
the fish-pond, and the old walled kitchen-garden; and about the pig-styes, and the
stables, and the pigeon-house, and the hen-house; and about the dairy, and the washhouse, and the china-cupboards, and the linenpresses (she liked that bit especially); and
about the banqueting-hall, and the fun they had there when the other animals were
gathered round the table and Toad was at his best, singing songs, telling stories,
carrying on generally. Then she wanted to know about his animal-friends, and was
very interested in all he had to tell her about them and how they lived, and what they
did to pass their time. Of course, she did not say she was fond of animals as pets,
because she had the sense to see that Toad would be extremely offended. When she
said good night, having filled his water-jug and shaken up his straw for him, Toad was
very much the same sanguine, self-satisfied animal that he had been of old. He sang a
little song or two, of the sort he used to sing at his dinner-parties, curled himself up in
the straw, and had an excellent night’s rest and the pleasantest of dreams.
They had many interesting talks together, after that, as the dreary days went on; and
the gaoler’s daughter grew very sorry for Toad, and thought it a great shame that a
poor little animal should be locked up in prison for what seemed to her a very trivial
offence. Toad, of course, in his vanity, thought that her interest in him proceeded from
a growing tenderness; and he could not help half-regretting that the social gulf between
them was so very wide, for she was a comely lass, and evidently admired him very
much.
One morning the girl was very thoughtful, and answered at random, and did not seem
to Toad to be paying proper attention to his witty sayings and sparkling comments.
‘Toad,’ she said presently, ‘just listen, please. I have an aunt who is a washerwoman.’
‘There, there,’ said Toad, graciously and affably, ‘never mind; think no more about it. I
have several aunts who ought to be washerwomen.’
‘Do be quiet a minute, Toad,’ said the girl. ‘You talk too much, that’s your chief fault,
and I’m trying to think, and you hurt my head. As I said, I have an aunt who is a
washerwoman; she does the washing for all the prisoners in this castle- we try to keep
any paying business of that sort in the family, you understand.
She takes out the washing on Monday morning, and brings it in on Friday evening.
This is a Thursday. Now, this is what occurs to me: you’re very rich- at least you’re
always telling me so- and she’s very poor. A few pounds wouldn’t make any difference
to you, and it would mean a lot to her. Now, I think if she were properly approachedsquared, I believe is the word you animals use- you could come to some arrangement
by which she would let you have her dress and bonnet and so on, and you could escape
from the castle as the official washerwoman.
You’re very alike in many respects- particularly about the figure.’ ‘We’re not,’ said the
Toad in a huff. ‘I have a very elegant figure- for what I am.’ ‘So has my aunt,’ replied
the girl, ‘for what she is. But have it your own way.
You horrid, proud, ungrateful animal, when I’m sorry for you, and trying to help you!’
‘Yes, yes, that’s all right; thank you very much indeed,’ said the Toad hurriedly. ‘But
look here! you wouldn’t surely have Mr. Toad, of Toad Hall, going about the country
disguised as a washerwoman!’ ‘Then you can stop here as a Toad,’ replied the girl with
much spirit. ‘I suppose you want coach-and-four!’
Honest Toad was always ready to admit himself in the wrong. ‘You are a good, kind,
clever girl,’ he said, ‘and I am indeed a proud and a stupid toad. Introduce me to your
worthy aunt, if you will be so kind, and I have no doubt that the excellent lady and I
will be able to arrange terms satisfactory to both parties.’ Next evening the girl ushered
her aunt into Toad’s cell, bearing his week’s washing pinned up in a towel. The old
lady had been prepared beforehand for the interview, and the sight of certain gold
sovereigns that Toad had thoughtfully placed on the table in full view practically
completed the matter and left little further to discuss. In return for his cash, Toad
received a cotton print gown, an apron, a shawl, and a rusty black bonnet; the only
stipulation the old lady made being that she should be gagged and bound and dumped
down in a corner. By this not very convincing artifice, she explained, aided by
picturesque fiction which she could supply herself, she hoped to retain her situation, in
spite of the suspicious appearance of things.
Toad was delighted with the suggestion. It would enable him to leave the prison in
some style, and with his reputation for being a desperate and dangerous fellow
untarnished; and he readily helped the gaoler’s daughter to make her aunt appear as
much as possible the victim of circumstances over which she had no control.
‘Now it’s your turn, Toad; said the girl. ‘Take off that coat and waistcoat of yours;
you’re fat enough as it is.’
Shaking with laughter, she proceeded to ‘hook-and-eye’ him into the cotton print
gown, arranged the shawl with a professional fold, and tied the strings of the rusty
bonnet under his chin.
‘You’re the very image of her,’ she giggled, ‘only I’m sure you never looked half so
respectable in all your life before. Now, good-bye, Toad, and good luck.
Go straight down the way you came up; and if any one says anything to you, as they
probably will, being but men, you can chaff back a bit, of course, but remember you’re
a widow woman, quite alone in the world, with a character to lose.’ With a quaking
heart, but as firm a footstep as he could command, Toad set forth cautiously on what
seemed to be a most hare-brained and hazardous undertaking; but he was soon
agreeably surprised to find how easy everything was made for him, and a little
humbled at the thought that both his popularity, and the sex that seemed to inspire it,
were really another’s. The washerwoman’s squat figure in its familiar cotton print
seemed a passport for every barred door and grim gateway; even when he hesitated,
uncertain as to the right turning to take, he found himself helped out of his difficulty by
the warder at the next gate, anxious to be off to his tea, summoning him to come along
sharp and not keep him waiting there all night. The chaff and the humourous sallies to
which he was subjected, and to which, of course, he had to provide prompt and
effective reply, formed, indeed, his chief danger; for Toad was an animal with a strong
sense of his own dignity, and the chaff was mostly (he thought) poor and clumsy, and
the humour of the sallies entirely lacking. However, he kept his temper, though with
great difficulty, suited his retorts to his company and his supposed character, and did
his best not to overstep the limits of good taste.
It seemed hours before he crossed the last courtyard, rejected the pressing invitations
from the last guardroom, and dodged the outspread arms of the last warder, pleading
with simulated passion for just one farewell embrace. But at last he heard the wicketgate in the great outer door click behind him, felt the fresh air of the outer world upon
his anxious brow, and knew that he was free!
Dizzy with the easy success of his daring exploit, he walked quickly towards the lights
of the town, not knowing in the least what he should do next, only quite certain of one
thing, that he must remove himself as quickly as possible from the neighbourhood
where the lady he was forced to represent was so well-known and so popular a
character.
As he walked along, considering, his attention was caught by some red and green
lights a little way off, to one side of the town, and the sound of the puffing and snorting
of engines and the banging of shunted trucks fell on his ear. ‘Aha!’ he thought, ‘this is a
piece of luck! A railway station is the thing I want most in the whole world at this
moment; and what’s more, I needn’t go through the town to get it, and shan’t have to
support this humiliating character by repartees which, though thoroughly effective, do
not assist one’s sense of self-respect.
He made his way to the station accordingly, consulted a time-table, and found that a
train, bound more or less in the direction of his home, was due to start in half-an-hour.
‘More luck!’ said Toad, his spirits rising rapidly, and went off to the booking-office to
buy his ticket.
He gave the name of the station that he knew to be nearest to the village of which Toad
Hall was the principal feature, and mechanically put his fingers, in search of the
necessary money, where his waistcoat pocket should have been. But here the cotton
gown, which had nobly stood by him so far, and which he had basely forgotten,
intervened, and frustrated his efforts. In a sort of nightmare he struggled with the
strange uncanny thing that seemed to hold his hands, turn all muscular strivings to
water, and laugh at him all the time; while other travellers, forming up in a line behind,
waited with impatience, making suggestions of more or less value and comments of
more or less stringency and point. At last- somehow- he never rightly understood howhe burst the barriers, attained the goal, arrived at where all waistcoat pockets are
eternally situated, and found- not only no money, but no pocket to hold it, and no
waistcoat to hold the pocket!
To his horror he recollected that he had left both coat and waistcoat behind him in his
cell, and with them his pocket-book, money, keys, watch, matches, pencil-case- all that
makes life worth living, all that distinguishes the many-pocketed animal, the lord of
creation, from the inferior one-pocketed or no-pocketed productions that hop or trip
about permissively, unequipped for the real contest.
In his misery he made one desperate effort to carry the thing off, and, with a return to
his fine old manner- a blend of the Squire and the College Don- he said, ‘Look here! I
find I’ve left my purse behind. Just give me that ticket, will you, and I’ll send the
money on to-morrow? I’m well-known in these parts.’ The clerk stared at him and the
rusty black bonnet a moment, and then laughed. ‘I should think you were pretty well
known in these parts,’ he said, ‘if you’ve tried this game on often. Here, stand away
from the window, please, madam; you’re obstructing the other passengers An old
gentleman who had been prodding him in the back for some moments here thrust him
away, and, what was worse, addressed him as his good woman, which angered Toad
more than anything that had occurred that evening.
Baffled and full of despair, he wandered blindly down the platform where the train
was standing, and tears trickled down each side of his nose. It was hard, he thought, to
be within sight of safety and almost of home, and to be baulked by the want of a few
wretched shillings and by the pettifogging mistrustfulness of paid officials. Very soon
his escape would be discovered, the hunt would be up, he would be caught, reviled,
loaded with chains, dragged back again to prison and bread-and-water and straw; his
guards and penalities would be doubled; and O, what sarcastic remarks the girl would
make! What was to be done? He was not swift of foot; his figure was unfortunately
recognisable. Could he not squeeze under the seat of a carriage? He had seen this
method adopted by schoolboys, when the journey-money provided by thoughtful
parents had been diverted to other and better ends. As he pondered, he found himself
opposite the engine, which was being oiled, wiped, and generally caressed by its
affectionate driver, a burly man with an oil-can in one hand and a lump of cotton-waste
in the other.
‘Hullo, mother!’ said the engine-driver ‘what’s the trouble? You don’t look particularly
cheerful.’ ‘O, sir!’ said Toad, crying afresh, ‘I am a poor unhappy washerwoman, and
I’ve lost all my money, and can’t pay for a ticket, and I must get home to-night
somehow, and whatever I am to do I don’t know. O dear, O dear!’ ‘That’s a bad
business, indeed,’ said the engine-driver reflectively. ‘Lost your money- and can’t get
home- and got some kids, too, waiting for you, I dare say?’ ‘Any amount of ‘em,’
sobbed Toad. ‘And they’ll be hungry- and playing with matches- and upsetting lamps,
the little innocents!- and quarrelling, and going on generally. O dear, O dear!’ ‘Well, I’ll
tell you what I’ll do,’ said the good engine-driver. ‘You’re a washerwoman to your
trade, says you. Very well, that’s that. And I’m an engine-driver, as you well may see,
and there’s no denying it’s terribly dirty work. Uses up a power of shirts, it does, till
my missus is fair tired of washing of ‘em. If you’ll wash a few shirts for me when you
get home, and send ‘em along, I’ll give you a ride on my engine. It’s against the
Company’s regulations, but we’re not so very particular in these out-of-the-way parts.’
The Toad’s misery turned into rapture as he eagerly scrambled up into the cab of the
engine. Of course, he had never washed a shirt in his life, and couldn’t if he tried and,
anyhow, he wasn’t going to begin; but he thought: ‘When I get safely home to Toad
Hall, and have money again, and pockets to put it in, I will send the engine-driver
enough to pay for quite a quantity of washing, and that will be the same thing, or
better.’ The guard waved his welcome flag, the engine-driver whistled in cheerful
response, and the train moved out of the station. As the speed increased, and the Toad
could see on either side of him real fields, and trees, and hedges, and cows, and horses,
all flying past him, and as he thought how every minute was bringing him nearer to
Toad Hall, and sympathetic friends, and money to chink in his pocket, and a soft bed to
sleep in, and good things to eat, and praise and admiration at the recital of his
adventures and his surpassing cleverness, he began to skip up and down and shout
and sing snatches of song, to the great astonishment of the engine-driver, who had
come across washerwomen before, at long intervals, but never one at all like this.
They had covered many and many a mile, and Toad was already considering what he
would have for supper as soon as he got home, when he noticed that the engine-driver,
with a puzzled expression on his face, was leaning over the side of the engine and
listening hard. Then he saw him climb on to the coals and gaze out over the top of the
train; then he returned and said to Toad: ‘It’s very strange; we’re the last train running
in this direction to-night, yet I could be sworn that I heard another following us!’
Toad ceased his frivolous antics at once. He became grave and depressed, and a dull
pain in the lower part of his spine, communicating itself to his legs, made him want to
sit down and try desperately not to think of all the possibilities.
By this time the moon was shining brightly, and the engine-driver, steadying himself
on the coal, could command a view of the line behind them for a long distance.
Presently he called out, ‘I can see it clearly now! It is an engine, on our rails, coming
along at a great pace! It looks as if we were being pursued!’ The miserable Toad,
crouching in the coal-dust, tried hard to think of something to do, with dismal want of
success.
‘They are gaining on us fast!’ cried the engine-driver. And the engine is crowded with
the queerest lot of people! Men like ancient warders, waving halberds; policemen in
their helmets, waving truncheons; and shabbily dressed men in pot-hats, obvious and
unmistakable plain-clothes detectives even at this distance, waving revolvers and
walking-sticks; all waving, and all shouting the same thing- “Stop, stop, stop!”’ Then
Toad fell on his knees among the coals and, raising his clasped paws in supplication,
cried, ‘Save me, only save me, dear kind Mr. Engine-driver, and I will confess
everything! I am not the simple washerwoman I seem to be! I have no children waiting
for me, innocent or otherwise! I am a toad- the well-known and popular Mr. Toad, a
landed proprietor; I have just escaped, by my great daring and cleverness, from a
loathsome dungeon into which my enemies had flung me; and if those fellows on that
engine recapture me, it will be chains and breadand-water and straw and misery once
more for poor, unhappy, innocent Toad The engine-driver looked down upon him very
sternly, and said, ‘Now tell the truth; what were you put in prison for?’ ‘It was nothing
very much,’ said poor Toad, colouring deeply. ‘I only borrowed a motorcar while the
owners were at lunch; they had no need of it at the time. I didn’t mean to steal it, really;
but people- especially magistrates- take such harsh views of thoughtless and highspirited actions.’ The engine-driver looked very grave and said, ‘I fear that you have
been indeed a wicked toad, and by rights I ought to give you up to offended justice.
But you are evidently in sore trouble and distress, so I will not desert you. I don’t hold
with motor-cars, for one thing; and I don’t hold with being ordered about by policemen
when I’m on my own engine, for another. And the sight of an animal in tears always
makes me feel queer and soft-hearted. So cheer up, Toad! I’ll do my best, and we may
beat them yet!’ They piled on more coals, shovelling furiously; the furnace roared, the
sparks flew, the engine leapt and swung, but still their pursuers slowly gained. The
engine-driver, with a sigh, wiped his brow with a handful of cotton-waste, and said,
‘I’m afraid it’s no good, Toad. You see, they are running light, and they have the better
engine. There’s just one thing left for us to do, and it’s your only chance, so attend very
carefully to what I tell you. A short way ahead of us is a long tunnel, and on the other
side of that the line passes through a thick wood. Now, I will put on all the speed I can
while we are running through the tunnel, but the other fellows will slow down a bit,
naturally, for fear of an accident. When we are through, I will shut off steam and put on
brakes as hard as I can, and the moment it’s safe to do so you must jump and hide in
the wood, before they get through the tunnel and see you. Then I will go full speed
ahead again, and they can chase me if they like, for as long as they like, and as far as
they like. Now mind and be ready to jump when I tell you!’ They piled on more coals,
and the train shot into the tunnel, and the engine rushed and roared and rattled, till at
last they shot out at the other end into fresh air and the peaceful moonlight, and saw
the wood lying dark and helpful upon either side of the line. The driver shut off steam
and put on brakes, the Toad got down on the step, and as the train slowed down to
almost a walking pace he heard the driver call out, ‘Now, jump!’ Toad jumped, rolled
down a short embankment, picked himself up unhurt, scrambled into the wood and
hid.
Peeping out, he saw his train get up speed again and disappear at a great pace.
Then out of the tunnel burst the pursuing engine, roaring and whistling, her motley
crew waving their various weapons and shouting, ‘Stop! stop! stop!’ When they were
past, the Toad had a hearty laugh- for the first time since he was thrown into prison.
But he soon stopped laughing when he came to consider that it was now very late and
dark and cold, and he was in an unknown wood, with no money and no chance of
supper, and still far from friends and home; and the dead silence of everything, after
the roar and rattle of the train, was something of a shock. He dared not leave the shelter
of the trees, so he struck into the wood, with the idea of leaving the railway as far as
possible behind him.
After so many weeks within walls, he found the wood strange and unfriendly and
inclined, he thought, to make fun of him. Night-jars, sounding their mechanical rattle,
made him think that the wood was full of searching warders, closing in on him. An
owl, swooping noiselessly towards him, brushed his shoulder with its wing, making
him jump with the horrid certainty that it was a hand; then flitted off, moth-like,
laughing its low ho! ho! ho! which Toad thought in very poor taste. Once he met a fox,
who stopped, looked him up and down in a sarcastic sort of way, and said, ‘Hullo,
washerwoman! Half a pair of socks and a pillow-case short this week! Mind it doesn’t
occur again!’ and swaggered off, sniggering.
Toad looked about for a stone to throw at him, but could not succeed in finding one,
which vexed him more than anything. At last, cold, hungry, and tired out, he sought
the shelter of a hollow tree, where with branches and dead leaves he made himself as
comfortable a bed as he could, and slept soundly till the morning.
THE Water Rat was restless, and he did not exactly know why. To all appearance the
summer’s pomp was still at fullest height, and although in the tilled acres green had
given way to gold, though rowans were reddening, and the woods were dashed here
and there with a tawny fierceness, yet light and warmth and colour were still present in
undiminished measure, clean of any chilly premonitions of the passing year. But the
constant chorus of the orchards and hedges had shrunk to a casual evensong from a
few yet unwearied performers; the robin was beginning to assert himself once more;
and there was a feeling in the air of change and departure. The cuckoo, of course, had
long been silent; but many another feathered friend, for months a part of the familiar
landscape and its small society, was missing too, and it seemed that the ranks thinned
steadily day by day. Rat, ever observant of all winged movement, saw that it was
taking daily a southing tendency; and even as he lay in bed at night he thought he
could make out, passing in the darkness overhead, the beat and quiver of impatient
pinions, obedient to the peremptory call.
Nature’s Grand Hotel has its Season, like the others. As the guests one by one pack,
pay, and depart, and the seats at the table-d’hote shrink pitifully at each succeeding
meal; as suites of rooms are closed, carpets taken up, and waiters sent away; those
boarders who are staying on, en pension, until the next year’s full reopening, cannot
help being somewhat affected by all these flittings and farewells, this eager discussion
of plans, routes, and fresh quarters, this daily shrinkage in the stream of comradeship.
One gets unsettled, depressed, and inclined to be querulous. Why this craving for
change? Why not stay on quietly here, like us, and be jolly? You don’t know this hotel
out of the season, and what fun we have among ourselves, we fellows who remain and
see the whole interesting year out.
All very true, no doubt, the others always reply; we quite envy you- and some other
year perhaps- but just now we have engagements- and there’s the bus at the door- our
time is up! So they depart, with a smile and a nod, and we miss them, and feel
resentful. The Rat was a self-sufficing sort of animal, rooted to the land, and, whoever
went, he stayed; still, he could not help noticing what was in the air, and feeling some
of its influence in his bones.
It was difficult to settle down to anything seriously, with all this flitting going on.
Leaving the water-side, where rushes stood thick and tall in a stream that was
becoming sluggish and low, he wandered country-wards, crossed a field or two of
pasturage already looking dusty and parched, and thrust into the great sea of wheat,
yellow, wavy, and murmurous, full of quiet motion and small whisperings.
Here he often loved to wander, through the forest of stiff strong stalks that carried their
own golden sky away over his head- a sky that was always dancing, shimmering,
softly talking; or swaying strongly to the passing wind and recovering itself with a toss
and a merry laugh. Here, too, he had many small friends, a society complete in itself,
leading full and busy lives, but always with a spare moment to gossip, and exchange
news with a visitor. Today, however, though they were civil enough, the field-mice and
harvest-mice seemed preoccupied. Many were digging and tunnelling busily; others,
gathered together in small groups, examined plans and drawings of small flats, stated
to be desirable and compact, and situated conveniently near the Stores. Some were
hauling out dusty trunks and dress-baskets, others were already elbow-deep packing
their belongings; while everywhere piles and bundles of wheat, oats, barley, beechmast and nuts, lay about ready for transport.
‘Here’s old Ratty!’ they cried as soon as they saw him. ‘Come and bear a hand, Rat, and
don’t stand about idle!’ ‘What sort of games are you up to?’ said the Water Rat severely.
‘You know it isn’t time to be thinking of winter quarters yet, by a long way!’ ‘O yes, we
know that,’ explained a field-mouse rather shamefacedly; ‘but it’s always as well to be
in good time, isn’t it? We really must get all the furniture and baggage and stores
moved out of this before those horrid machines begin clicking round the fields; and
then, you know, the best flats get picked up so quickly nowadays, and if you’re late
you have to put up with anything; and they want such a lot of doing up, too, before
they’re fit to move into. Of course, we’re early, we know that; but we’re only just
making a start.’
‘O, bother starts,’ said the Rat. ‘It’s a splendid day. Come for a row, or a stroll along the
hedges, or a picnic in the woods, or something.’ ‘Well, I think not to-day, thank you,’
replied the field-mouse hurriedly. ‘Perhaps some other day- when we’ve more time-’
The Rat, with a snort of contempt, swung round to go, tripped over a hat-box, and fell,
with undignified remarks.
‘If people would be more careful,’ said a field-mouse rather stiffly, ‘and look where
they’re going, people wouldn’t hurt themselves- and forget themselves.
Mind that hold-all Rat! You’d better sit down somewhere. In an hour or two we may be
more free to attend to you.’ ‘You won’t be “free” as you call it, much this side of
Christmas, I can see that,’ retorted the Rat grumpily, as he picked his way out of the
field.
He returned somewhat despondently to his river again- his faithful, steady-going old
river, which never packed up, flitted, or went into winter quarters.
In the osiers which fringed the bank he spied a swallow sitting. Presently it was joined
by another, and then by a third; and the birds, fidgeting restlessly on their bough,
talked together earnestly and low.
‘What, already,’ said the Rat, strolling up to them. ‘What’s the hurry? I call it simply
ridiculous.’
‘O, we’re not off yet, if that’s what you mean,’ replied the first swallow.
‘We’re only making plans and arranging things. Talking it over, you know- what route
we’re taking this year, and where we’ll stop, and so on. That’s half the fun!’ ‘Fun?’ said
the Rat; ‘now that’s just what I don’t understand. If you’ve got to leave this pleasant
place, and your friends who will miss you, and your snug homes that you’ve just
settled into, why, when the hour strikes I’ve no doubt you’ll go bravely, and face all the
trouble and discomfort and change and newness, and make believe that you’re not very
unhappy. But to want to talk about it, or even think about it, till you really need‘No,
you don’t understand, naturally,’ said the second swallow. ‘First, we feel it stirring
within us, a sweet unrest; then back come the recollections one by one, like homing
pigeons. They flutter through our dreams at night, they fly with us in our wheelings
and circlings by day. We hunger to inquire of each other, to compare notes and assure
ourselves that it was all really true, as one by one the scents and sounds and names of
long-forgotten places come gradually back and beckon to us.’ ‘Couldn’t you stop on for
just this year?’ suggested the Water Rat, wistfully.
‘We’ll all do our best to make you feel at home. You’ve no idea what good times we
have here, while you are far away.’ ‘I tried “stopping on” one year,’ said the third
swallow. ‘I had grown so fond of the place that when the time came I hung back and let
the others go on without me. For a few weeks it was all well enough, but afterwards, O
the weary length of the nights! The shivering, sunless days! The air so clammy and
chill, and not an insect in an acre of it! No, it was no good; my courage broke down,
and one cold, stormy night I took wing, flying well inland on account of the strong
easterly gales. It was snowing hard as I beat through the passes of the great mountains,
and I had a stiff fight to win through; but never shall I forget the blissful feeling of the
hot sun again on my back as I sped down to the lakes that lay so blue and placid below
me, and the taste of my first fat insect! The past was like a bad dream; the future was all
happy holiday as I moved southwards week by week, easily, lazily, lingering as long as
I dared, but always heeding the call! No! I had had my warning; never again did I
think of disobedience.’ ‘Ah, yes, the call of the South, of the South!’ twittered the other
two dreamily.
‘Its songs its hues, its radiant air! O, do you remember-’ and, forgetting the Rat, they
slid into passionate reminiscence, while he listened fascinated, and his heart burned
within him. In himself, too, he knew that it was vibrating at last, that chord hitherto
dormant and unsuspected. The mere chatter of these southernbound birds, their pale
and second-hand reports, had yet power to awaken this wild new sensation and thrill
him through and through with it; what would one moment of the real thing work in
him- one passionate touch of the real southern sun, one waft of the authentic odor?
With closed eyes he dared to dream a moment in full abandonment, and when he
looked again the river seemed steely and chill, the green fields grey and lightless. Then
his loyal heart seemed to cry out on his weaker self for its treachery.
‘Why do you ever come back, then, at all?’ he demanded of the swallows jealously.
‘What do you find to attract you in this poor drab little country?’ ‘And do you think,’
said the first swallow, ‘that the other call is not for us too, in its due season? The call of
lush meadow-grass, wet orchards, warm, insecthaunted ponds, of browsing cattle, of
haymaking, and all the farm-buildings clustering round the House of the perfect
Eaves? ‘Do you suppose,’ asked the second one, ‘that you are the only living thing that
craves with a hungry longing to hear the cuckoo’s note again?’ ‘In due time,’ said the
third, ‘we shall be home-sick once more for quiet waterlilies swaying on the surface of
an English stream. But to-day all that seems pale and thin and very far away. Just now
our blood dances to other music.’ They fell a-twittering among themselves once more,
and this time their intoxicating babble was of violet seas, tawny sands, and lizardhaunted walls.
Restlessly the Rat wandered off once more, climbed the slope that rose gently from the
north bank of the river, and lay looking out towards the great ring of Downs that
barred his vision further southwards- his simple horizon hitherto, his Mountains of the
Moon, his limit behind which lay nothing he had cared to see or to know. To-day, to
him gazing South with a new-born need stirring in his heart, the clear sky over their
long low outline seemed to pulsate with promise; to-day, the unseen was everything,
the unknown the only real fact of life. On this side of the hills was now the real blank,
on the other lay the crowded and coloured panorama that his inner eye was seeing so
clearly. What seas lay beyond, green, leaping, and crested! What sun-bathed coasts,
along which the white villas glittered against the olive woods! What quiet harbours,
thronged with gallant shipping bound for purple islands of wine and spice, islands set
low in languorous waters!
He rose and descended river-wards once more; then changed his mind and sought the
side of the dusty lane. There, lying half-buried in the thick, cool underhedge tangle that
bordered it, he could muse on the metalled road and all the wondrous world that it led
to; on all the wayfarers, too, that might have trodden it, and the fortunes and
adventures they had gone to seek or found unseeking- out there, beyond- beyond!
Footsteps fell on his ear, and the figure of one that walked somewhat wearily came into
view; and he saw that it was a Rat, and a very dusty one. The wayfarer, as he reached
him, saluted with a gesture of courtesy that had something foreign about it- hesitated a
moment- then with a pleasant smile turned from the track and sat down by his side in
the cool herbage. He seemed tired, and the Rat let him rest unquestioned,
understanding something of what was in his thoughts; knowing, too, the value all
animals attach at times to mere silent companionship, when the weary muscles slacken
and the mind marks time.
The wayfarer was lean and keen-featured, and somewhat bowed at the shoulders; his
paws were thin and long, his eyes much wrinkled at the corners, and he wore small
gold ear rings in his neatly-set well-shaped ears. His knitted jersey was of a faded blue,
his breeches, patched and stained, were based on a blue foundation, and his small
belongings that he carried were tied up in a blue cotton handkerchief.
When he had rested awhile the stranger sighed, snuffed the air, and looked about him.
‘That was clover, that warm whiff on the breeze,’ he remarked; ‘and those are cows we
hear cropping the grass behind us and blowing softly between mouthfuls. There is a
sound of distant reapers, and yonder rises a blue line of cottage smoke against the
woodland. The river runs somewhere close by, for I hear the call of a moorhen, and I
see by your build that you’re a freshwater mariner. Everything seems asleep, and yet
going on all the time. It is a goodly life that you lead, friend; no doubt the best in the
world, if only you are strong enough to lead it!’ ‘Yes, it’s the life, the only life, to live,’
responded the Water Rat dreamily, and without his usual whole-hearted conviction.
‘I did not say exactly that,’ replied the stranger cautiously; ‘but no doubt it’s the best.
I’ve tried it, and I know. And because I’ve just tried it- six months of itand know it’s the
best, here am I, footsore and hungry, tramping away from it, tramping southward,
following the old call, back to the old life, the life which is mine and which will not let
me go.’ ‘Is this, then, yet another of them?’ mused the Rat. ‘And where have you just
come from?’ he asked. He hardly dared to ask where he was bound for; he seemed to
know the answer only too well.
‘Nice little farm,’ replied the wayfarer, briefly. ‘Upalong in that direction’- he nodded
northwards. ‘Never mind about it. I had everything I could want- everything I had any
right to expect of life, and more; and here I am! Glad to be here all the same, though,
glad to be here! So many miles further on the road, so many hours nearer to my heart’s
desire!’ His shining eyes held fast to the horizon, and he seemed to be listening for
some sound that was wanting from that inland acreage, vocal as it was with the
cheerful music of pasturage and farmyard.
‘You are not one of us,’ said the Water Rat, ‘nor yet a farmer; nor even, I should judge,
of this country.’ ‘Right,’ replied the stranger. ‘I’m a sea-faring rat, I am, and the port I
originally hail from is Constantinople, though I’m a sort of a foreigner there too, in a
manner of speaking. You will have heard of Constantinople, friend? A fair city, and an
ancient and glorious one. And you may have heard, too, of Sigurd, King of Norway,
and how he sailed thither with sixty ships, and how he and his men rode up through
streets all canopied in their honour with purple and gold; and how the Emperor and
Empress came down and banqueted with him on board his ship. When Sigurd returned
home, many of his Northmen remained behind and entered the Emperor’s body-guard,
and my ancestor, a Norwegian born, stayed behind too, with the ships that Sigurd gave
the Emperor. Seafarers we have ever been, and no wonder; as for me, the city of my
birth is no more my home than any pleasant port between there and the London River.
I know them all, and they know me. Set me down on any of their quays or foreshores,
and I am home again.’ ‘I suppose you go great voyages,’ said the Water Rat with
growing interest.
‘Months and months out of sight of land, and provisions running short, and allowanced
as to water, and your mind communing with the mighty ocean, and all that sort of
thing?’ ‘By no means,’ said the Sea Rat frankly. ‘Such a life as you describe would not
suit me at all. I’m in the coasting trade, and rarely out of sight of land. It’s the jolly
times on shore that appeal to me, as much as any seafaring. O, those southern seaports!
The smell of them, the riding-lights at night, the glamour!’ ‘Well, perhaps you have
chosen the better way,’ said the Water Rat, but rather doubtfully. ‘Tell me something of
your coasting, then, if you have a mind to, and what sort of harvest an animal of spirit
might hope to bring home from it to warm his latter days with gallant memories by the
fireside; for my life, I confess to you, feels to me to-day somewhat narrow and
circumscribed.’ ‘My last voyage,’ began the Sea Rat, ‘that landed me eventually in this
country, bound with high hopes for my inland farm, will serve as a good example of
any of them, and, indeed, as an epitome of my highly-coloured life. Family troubles, as
usual, began it. The domestic storm-cone was hoisted, and I shipped myself on board a
small trading vessel bound from Constantinople, by classic seas whose every wave
throbs with a deathless memory, to the Grecian Islands and the Levant. Those were
golden days and balmy nights! In and out of harbour all the time- old friends
everywhere- sleeping in some cool temple or ruined cistern during the heat of the dayfeasting and song after sundown, under great stars set in a velvet sky! Thence we
turned and coasted up the Adriatic, its shores swimming in an atmosphere of amber,
rose, and aquamarine; we lay in wide land-locked harbours, we roamed through
ancient and noble cities, until at last one morning, as the sun rose royally behind us, we
rode into Venice down a path of gold. O, Venice is a fine city, wherein a rat can wander
at his ease and take his pleasure! Or, when weary of wandering, can sit at the edge of
the Grand Canal at night, feasting with his friends, when the air is full of music and the
sky full of stars, and the lights flash and shimmer on the polished steel prows of the
swaying gondolas, packed so that you could walk across the canal on them from side to
side! And then the food- do you like shellfish? Well, well, we won’t linger over that
now.’ He was silent for a time; and the Water Rat, silent too and enthralled, floated on
dream-canals and heard a phantom song pealing high between vaporous grey wavelapped walls.
‘Southwards we sailed again at last,’ continued the Sea Rat, ‘coasting down the Italian
shore, till finally we made Palermo, and there I quitted for a long, happy spell on shore.
I never stick too long to one ship; one gets narrow-minded and prejudiced. Besides,
Sicily is one of my happy hunting-grounds. I know everybody there, and their ways
just suit me. I spent many jolly weeks in the island, staying with friends up country.
When I grew restless again I took advantage of a ship that was trading to Sardinia and
Corsica; and very glad I was to feel the fresh breeze and the sea-spray in my face once
more.’ ‘But isn’t it very hot and stuffy, down in the- hold, I think you call it?’ asked the
Water Rat.
The seafarer looked at him with the suspicion of a wink. ‘I’m an old hand,’ he
remarked with much simplicity. ‘The captain’s cabin’s good enough for me.’ ‘It’s a hard
life, by all accounts,’ murmured the Rat, sunk in deep thought.
‘For the crew it is,’ replied the seafarer gravely, again with the ghost of a wink.
‘From Corsica,’ he went on, ‘I made use of a ship that was taking wine to the mainland.
We made Alassio in the evening, lay to, hauled up our wine-casks, and hove them
overboard, tied one to the other by a long line. Then the crew took to the boats and
rowed shorewards, singing as they went, and drawing after them the long bobbing
procession of casks, like a mile of porpoises. On the sands they had horses waiting,
which dragged the casks up the steep street of the little town with a fine rush and
clatter and scramble. When the last cask was in, we went and refreshed and rested, and
sat late into the night, drinking with our friends, and next morning I took to the great
olive-woods for a spell and a rest. For now I had done with islands for the time, and
ports and shipping were plentiful; so I led a lazy life among the peasants, lying and
watching them work, or stretched high on the hillside with the blue Mediterranean far
below me. And so at length, by easy stages, and partly on foot, partly by sea, to
Marseilles, and the meeting of old shipmates, and the visiting of great ocean-bound
vessels, and feasting once more. Talk of shell-fish! Why, sometimes I dream of the shellfish of Marseilles, and wake up crying!’ ‘That reminds me,’ said the polite Water Rat;
‘you happened to mention that you were hungry, and I ought to have spoken earlier.
Of course, you will stop and take your midday meal with me? My hole is close by; it is
some time past noon, and you are very welcome to whatever there is.’ ‘Now I call that
kind and brotherly of you,’ said the Sea Rat. ‘I was indeed hungry when I sat down,
and ever since I inadvertently happened to mention shellfish, my pangs have been
extreme. But couldn’t you fetch it along out here? I am none too fond of going under
hatches, unless I’m obliged to; and then, while we eat, I could tell you more concerning
my voyages and the pleasant life I lead- at least, it is very pleasant to me, and by your
attention I judge it commends itself to you; whereas if we go indoors it is a hundred to
one that I shall presently fall asleep.’ ‘That is indeed an excellent suggestion,’ said the
Water Rat, and hurried off home. There he got out the luncheon-basket and packed a
simple meal, in which, remembering the stranger’s origin and preferences, he took care
to include a yard of long French bread, a sausage out of which the garlic sang, some
cheese which lay down and cried, and a long-necked straw-covered flask wherein lay
bottled sunshine shed and garnered on far Southern slopes. Thus laden, he returned
with all speed, and blushed for pleasure at the old seaman’s commendations of his taste
and judgment, as together they unpacked the basket and laid out the contents on the
grass by the roadside.
The Sea Rat, as soon as his hunger was somewhat assuaged, continued the history of
his latest voyage, conducting his simple hearer from port to port of Spain, landing him
at Lisbon, Oporto, and Bordeaux, introducing him to the pleasant harbours of Cornwall
and Devon, and so up the Channel to that final quayside, where, landing after winds
long contrary, storm-driven and weather-beaten, he had caught the first magical hints
and heraldings of another Spring, and, fired by these, had sped on a long tramp inland,
hungry for the experiment of life on some quiet farmstead, very far from the weary
beating of any sea.
Spell-bound and quivering with excitement, the Water Rat followed the Adventurer
league by league, over stormy bays, through crowded roadsteads, across harbour bars
on a racing tide, up winding rivers that hid their busy little towns round a sudden turn;
and left him with a regretful sigh planted at his dull inland farm, about which he
desired to hear nothing.
By this time their meal was over, and the Seafarer, refreshed and strengthened, his
voice more vibrant, his eye lit with a brightness that seemed caught from some faraway sea-beacon, filled his glass with the red and glowing vintage of the South, and,
leaning towards the Water Rat, compelled his gaze and held him, body and soul, while
he talked. Those eyes were of the changing foamstreaked grey-green of leaping
Northern seas; in the glass shone a hot ruby that seemed the very heart of the South,
beating for him who had courage to respond to its pulsation. The twin lights, the
shifting grey and the steadfast red, mastered the Water Rat and held him bound,
fascinated, powerless. The quiet world outside their rays receded far away and ceased
to be. And the talk, the wonderful talk flowed on- or was it speech entirely, or did it
pass at times into song- chanty of the sailors weighing the dripping anchor, sonorous
hum of the shrouds in a tearing North-Easter, ballad of the fisherman hauling his nets
at sundown against an apricot sky, chords of guitar and mandoline from gondola or
caique? Did it change into the cry of the wind, plaintive at first, angrily shrill as it
freshened, rising to a tearing whistle, sinking to a musical trickle of air from the leech
of the bellying sail? All these sounds the spell-bound listener seemed to hear, and with
them the hungry complaint of the gulls and the sea-mews, the soft thunder of the
breaking wave, the cry of the protesting shingle. Back into speech again it passed, and
with beating heart he was following the adventures of a dozen seaports, the fights, the
escapes, the rallies, the comradeships, the gallant undertakings; or he searched islands
for treasure, fished in still lagoons and dozed day-long on warm white sand. Of deepsea fishings he heard tell, and mighty silver gatherings of the mile-long net; of sudden
perils, noise of breakers on a moonless night, or the tall bows of the great liner taking
shape overhead through the fog; of the merry homecoming, the headland rounded, the
harbour lights opened out; the groups seen dimly on the quay, the cheery hail, the
splash of the hawser; the trudge up the steep little street towards the comforting glow
of red-curtained windows.
Lastly, in his waking dream it seemed to him that the Adventurer had risen to his feet,
but was still speaking, still holding him fast with his sea-grey eyes.
‘And now,’ he was softly saying, ‘I take to the road again, holding on southwestwards
for many a long and dusty day; till at last I reach the little grey sea town I know so
well, that clings along one steep side of the harbour. There through dark doorways you
look down flights of stone steps, overhung by great pink tufts of valerian and ending in
a patch of sparkling blue water. The little boats that lie tethered to the rings and
stanchions of the old sea-wall are gaily painted as those I clambered in and out of in my
own childhood; the salmon leap on the flood tide, schools of mackerel flash and play
past quay-sides and foreshores, and by the windows the great vessels glide, night and
day, up to their moorings or forth to the open sea. There, sooner or later, the ships of all
seafaring nations arrive; and there, at its destined hour, the ship of my choice will let go
its anchor. I shall take my time, I shall tarry and bide, till at last the right one lies
waiting for me, warped out into midstream, loaded low, her bowsprit pointing down
harbour. I shall slip on board, by boat or along hawser; and then one morning I shall
wake to the song and tramp of the sailors, the clink of the capstan, and the rattle of the
anchor-chain coming merrily in. We shall break out the jib and the foresail, the white
houses on the harbour side will glide slowly past us as she gathers steering-way, and
the voyage will have begun! As she forges towards the headland she will clothe herself
with canvas; and then, once outside, the sounding slap of great green seas as she heels
to the wind, pointing South!
‘And you, you will come too, young brother; for the days pass, and never return, and
the South still waits for you. Take the Adventure, heed the call, now ere the irrevocable
moment passes!’ ‘Tis but a banging of the door behind you, a blithesome step forward,
and you are out of the old life and into the new! Then some day, some day long hence,
jog home here if you will, when the cup has been drained and the play has been
played, and sit down by your quiet river with a store of goodly memories for company.
You can easily overtake me on the road, for you are young, and I am ageing and go
softly. I will linger, and look back; and at last I will surely see you coming, eager and
light-hearted, with all the South in your face!’ The voice died away and ceased as an
insect’s tiny trumpet dwindles swiftly into silence; and the Water Rat, paralysed and
staring, saw at last but a distant speck on the white surface of the road.
Mechanically he rose and proceeded to repack the luncheon-basket, carefully and
without haste. Mechanically he returned home, gathered together a few small
necessaries and special treasures he was fond of, and put them in a satchel; acting with
slow deliberation, moving about the room like a sleep-walker; listening ever with
parted lips. He swung the satchel over his shoulder, carefully selected a stout stick for
his wayfaring, and with no haste, but with no hesitation at all, he stepped across the
threshold just as the Mole appeared at the door.
‘Why, where are you off to, Ratty?’ asked the Mole in great surprise, grasping him by
the arm.
‘Going South, with the rest of them,’ murmured the Rat in a dreamy monotone, never
looking at him. ‘Seawards first and then on shipboard, and so to the shores that are
calling me!’ He pressed resolutely forward, still without haste, but with dogged fixity
of purpose; but the Mole, now thoroughly alarmed, placed himself in front of him, and
looking into his eyes saw that they were glazed and set and turned a streaked and
shifting grey- not his friend’s eyes, but the eyes of some other animal! Grappling with
him strongly he dragged him inside, threw him down, and held him.
The Rat struggled desperately for a few moments, and then his strength seemed
suddenly to leave him, and he lay still and exhausted, with closed eyes, trembling.
Presently the Mole assisted him to rise and placed him in a chair, where he sat
collapsed and shrunken into himself, his body shaken by a violent shivering, passing in
time into an hysterical fit of dry sobbing. Mole made the door fast, threw the satchel
into a drawer and locked it, and sat down quietly on the table by his friend, waiting for
the strange seizure to pass. Gradually the Rat sank into a troubled doze, broken by
starts and confused murmurings of things strange and wild and foreign to the
unenlightened Mole; and from that he passed into a deep slumber.
Very anxious in mind, the Mole left him for a time and busied himself with household
matters; and it was getting dark when he returned to the parlour and found the Rat
where he had left him, wide awake indeed, but listless, silent, and dejected. He took
one hasty glance at his eyes; found them, to his great gratification, clear and dark and
brown again as before; and then sat down and tried to cheer him up and help him to
relate what had happened to him.
Poor Ratty did his best, by degrees, to explain things; but how could he put into cold
words what had mostly been suggestion? How recall, for another’s benefit, the
haunting sea voices that had sung to him, how reproduce at second-hand the magic of
the Seafarer’s hundred reminiscences? Even to himself, now the spell was broken and
the glamour gone, he found it difficult to account for what had seemed, some hours
ago, the inevitable and only thing. It is not surprising, then, that he failed to convey to
the Mole any clear idea of what he had been through that day.
To the Mole this much was plain: the fit, or attack, had passed away, and had left him
sane again, though shaken and cast down by the reaction. But he seemed to have lost
all interest for the time in the things that went to make up his daily life, as well as in all
pleasant forecastings of the altered days and doings that the changing season was
surely bringing.
Casually, then, and with seeming indifference, the Mole turned his talk to the harvest
that was being gathered in, the towering wagons and their straining teams, the
growing ricks, and the large moon rising over bare acres dotted with sheaves.
He talked of the reddening apples around, of the browning nuts, of jams and preserves
and the distilling of cordials; till by easy stages such as these he reached midwinter, its
hearty joys and its snug home life, and then he became simply lyrical.
By degrees the Rat began to sit up and to join in. His dull eye brightened, and he lost
some of his listening air.
Presently the tactful Mole slipped away and returned with a pencil and a few halfsheets of paper, which he placed on the table at his friend’s elbow.
‘It’s quite a long time since you did any poetry,’ he remarked. ‘You might have a try at
it this evening, instead of- well, brooding over things so much. I’ve an idea that you’ll
feel a lot better when you’ve got something jotted down- if it’s only just the rhymes.’
The Rat pushed the paper away from him wearily, but the discreet Mole took occasion
to leave the room, and when he peeped in again some time later, the Rat was absorbed
and deaf to the world; alternately scribbling and sucking the top of his pencil. It is true
that he sucked a good deal more than he scribbled; but it was joy to the Mole to know
that the cure had at least begun.
THE front door of the hollow tree faced eastwards, so Toad was called at an early hour;
partly by the bright sunlight streaming in on him, partly by the exceeding coldness of
his toes, which made him dream that he was at home in bed in his own handsome
room with the Tudor window, on a cold winter’s night, and his bedclothes had got up,
grumbling and protesting they couldn’t stand the cold any longer, and had run
downstairs to the kitchen fire to warm themselves; and he had followed, on bare feet,
along miles and miles of icy stone-paved passages, arguing and beseeching them to be
reasonable. He would probably have been aroused much earlier, had he not slept for
some weeks on straw over stone flags, and almost forgotten the friendly feeling of thick
blankets pulled well up round the chin.
Sitting up, he rubbed his eyes first and his complaining toes next, wondered for a
moment where he was, looking round for familiar stone wall and little barred window;
then, with a leap of the heart, remembered everything- his escape, his flight, his
pursuit; remembered, first and best thing of all, that he was free!
Free! The word and the thought alone were worth fifty blankets. He was warm from
end to end as he thought of the jolly world outside, waiting eagerly for him to make his
triumphal entrance, ready to serve him and play up to him, anxious to help him and to
keep him company, as it always had been in days of old before misfortune fell upon
him. He shook himself and combed the dry leaves out of his hair with his fingers; and,
his toilet complete, marched forth into the comfortable morning sun, cold but
confident, hungry but hopeful, all nervous terrors of yesterday dispelled by rest and
sleep and frank and heartening sunshine.
He had the world all to himself, that early summer morning. The dewy woodland, as
he threaded it, was solitary and still: the green fields that succeeded the trees were his
own to do as he liked with; the road itself, when he reached it, in that loneliness that
was everywhere, seemed, like a stray dog, to be looking anxiously for company. Toad,
however, was looking for something that could talk, and tell him clearly which way he
ought to go. It is all very well, when you have a light heart, and a clear conscience, and
money in your pocket, and nobody scouring the country for you to drag you off to
prison again, to follow where the road beckons and points, not caring whither. The
practical Toad cared very much indeed, and he could have kicked the road for its
helpless silence when every minute was of importance to him.
The reserved rustic road was presently joined by a shy little brother in the shape of a
canal, which took its hand and ambled along by its side in perfect confidence, but with
the same tongue-tied, uncommunicative attitude towards strangers. ‘Bother them!’ said
Toad to himself. ‘But, anyhow, one thing’s clear. They must both be coming from
somewhere, and going to somewhere. You can’t get over that, Toad, my boy!’ So he
marched on patiently by the water’s edge.
Round a bend in the canal came plodding a solitary horse, stooping forward as if in
anxious thought. From rope traces attached to his collar stretched a long line, taut, but
dipping with his stride, the further part of it dripping pearly drops.
Toad let the horse pass, and stood waiting for what the fates were sending him.
With a pleasant swirl of quiet water at its blunt bow the barge slid up alongside of him,
its gaily painted gunwale level with the towing-path, its sole occupant a big stout
woman wearing a linen sun-bonnet, one brawny arm laid along the tiller.
‘A nice morning, ma’am!’ she remarked to Toad, as she drew up level with him.
‘I dare say it is, ma’am!’ responded Toad politely, as he walked along the towpath
abreast of her. ‘I dare it is a nice morning to them that’s not in sore trouble, like what I
am. Here’s my married daughter, she sends off to me post-haste to come to her at once;
so off I comes, not knowing what may be happening or going to happen, but fearing
the worst, as you will understand, ma’am, if you’re a mother, too. And I’ve left my
business to look after itself- I’m in the washing and laundering line, you must know,
ma’am- and I’ve left my young children to look after themselves, and a more
mischievous and troublesome set of young imps doesn’t exist, ma’am; and I’ve lost all
my money, and lost my way, and as for what may be happening to my married
daughter, why, I don’t like to think of it, ma’am!’ ‘Where might your married daughter
be living, ma’am?’ asked the bargewoman.
‘She lives near to the river, ma’am,’ replied Toad. ‘Close to a fine house called Toad
Hall, that’s somewheres hereabouts in these parts. Perhaps you may have heard of it.’
‘Toad Hall? Why, I’m going that way myself,’ replied the barge-woman.
‘This canal joins the river some miles further on, a little above Toad Hall; and then it’s
an easy walk. You come along in the barge with me, and I’ll give you a lift.’ She steered
the barge close to the bank, and Toad, with many humble and grateful
acknowledgments, stepped lightly on board and sat down with great satisfaction.
‘Toad’s luck again!’ thought he. ‘I always come out on top!’ ‘So you’re in the washing
business, ma’am?’ said the barge-woman politely, as they glided along. ‘And a very
good business you’ve got too, I dare say, if I’m not making too free in saying so.’ ‘Finest
business in the whole country,’ said Toad airily. ‘All the gentry come to me- wouldn’t
go to any one else if they were paid, they know me so well. You see, I understand my
work thoroughly, and attend to it all myself. Washing, ironing, clear-starching, making
up gents’ fine shirts for evening wear- everything’s done under my own eye!’ ‘But
surely you don’t do all that work yourself, ma’am?’ asked the bargewoman
respectfully.
‘O, I have girls,’ said Toad lightly: ‘twenty girls or thereabouts, always at work. But
you know what girls are, ma’am! Nasty little hussies, that’s what I call ‘em!’ ‘So do I,
too,’ said the barge-woman with great heartiness. ‘But I dare say you set yours to
rights, the idle trollops! And are you very fond of washing?’ ‘I love it,’ said Toad. ‘I
simply dote on it. Never so happy as when I’ve got both arms in the wash-tub. But,
then, it comes so easy to me! No trouble at all! A real pleasure, I assure you, ma’am!’
‘What a bit of luck, meeting you!’ observed the barge-woman, thoughtfully.
‘A regular piece of good fortune for both of us!’ ‘Why, what do you mean?’ asked Toad,
nervously.
‘Well, look at me, now,’ replied the barge-woman. ‘I like washing, too, just the same as
you do; and for that matter, whether I like it or not I have got to do all my own,
naturally, moving about as I do. Now my husband, he’s such a fellow for shirking his
work and leaving the barge to me, that never a moment do I get for seeing to my own
affairs. By rights he ought to be here now, either steering or attending to the horse,
though luckily the horse has sense enough to attend to himself. Instead of which, he’s
gone off with the dog, to see if they can’t pick up a rabbit for dinner somewhere. Says
he’ll catch me up at the next lock. Well, that’s as may be- I don’t trust him, once he gets
off with that dog, who’s worse than he is. But meantime, how am I to get on with my
washing?’ ‘O, never mind about the washing,’ said Toad, not liking the subject. ‘Try
and fix your mind on that rabbit. A nice fat young rabbit, I’ll be bound. Got any
onions?’ ‘I can’t fix my mind on anything but my washing,’ said the barge-woman,
‘and I wonder you can be talking of rabbits, with such a joyful prospect before you.
There’s a heap of things of mine that you’ll find in a corner of the cabin. If you’ll just
take one or two of the most necessary sort- I won’t venture to describe them to a lady
like you, but you’ll recognise them at a glance- and put them through the wash-tub as
we go along, why, it’ll be a pleasure to you, as you rightly say, and a real help to me.
You’ll find a tub handy, and soap, and a kettle on the stove, and a bucket to haul up
water from the canal with. Then I shall know you’re enjoying yourself, instead of
sitting here idle, looking at the scenery and yawning your head off.’ ‘Here, you let me
steer!’ said Toad, now thoroughly frightened, ‘and then you can get on with your
washing your own way. I might spoil your things, or not do ‘em as you like. I’m more
used to gentlemen’s things myself. It’s my special line.’ ‘Let you steer?’ replied the
barge-woman, laughing. ‘It takes some practice to steer a barge properly. Besides, it’s
dull work, and I want you to be happy. No, you shall do the washing you are so fond
of, and I’ll stick to the steering that I understand. Don’t try and deprive me of the
pleasure of giving you a treat!’ Toad was fairly cornered. He looked for escape this way
and that, saw that he was too far from the bank for a flying leap, and sullenly resigned
himself to his fate. ‘If it comes to that,’ he thought in desperation, ‘I suppose any fool
can wash!’ He fetched tub, soap, and other necessaries from the cabin, selected a few
garments at random, tried to recollect what he had seen in casual glances through
laundry windows, and set to.
A long half-hour passed, and every minute of it saw Toad getting crosser and crosser.
Nothing that he could do to the things seemed to please them or do them good. He
tried coaxing, he tried slapping, he tried punching; they smiled back at him out of the
tub unconverted, happy in their original sin. Once or twice he looked nervously over
his shoulder at the barge-woman, but she appeared to be gazing out in front of her,
absorbed in her steering. His back ached badly, and he noticed with dismay that his
paws were beginning to get all crinkly. Now Toad was very proud of his paws. He
muttered under his breath words that should never pass the lips of either
washerwomen or Toads; and lost the soap, for the fiftieth time.
A burst of laughter made him straighten himself and look round. The bargewoman was
leaning back and laughing unrestrainedly, till the tears ran down her cheeks.
‘I’ve been watching you all the time,’ she gasped. ‘I thought you must be a humbug all
along, from the conceited way you talked. Pretty washerwoman you are! Never
washed so much as a dish-clout in your life, I’ll lay!’ Toad’s temper which had been
simmering viciously for some time, now fairly boiled over, and he lost all control of
himself.
‘You common, low, fat barge-woman!’ he shouted; ‘don’t you dare to talk to your
betters like that! Washerwoman indeed! I would have you to know that I am a Toad, a
very well-known, respected, distinguished Toad! I may be under a bit of a cloud at
present, but I will not be laughed at by a barge-woman!’ The woman moved nearer to
him and peered under his bonnet keenly and closely. ‘Why, so you are!’ she cried.
‘Well, I never! A horrid, nasty, crawly Toad! And in my nice clean barge, too! Now that
is a thing that I will not have.’ She relinquished the tiller for a moment. One big mottled
arm shot out and caught Toad by a fore-leg, while the other gripped him fast by a hindleg. Then the world turned suddenly upside down, the barge seemed to flit lightly
across the sky, the wind whistled in his ears, and Toad found himself flying through
the air, revolving rapidly as he went.
The water, when he eventually reached it with a loud splash, proved quite cold enough
for his taste, though its chill was not sufficient to quell his proud spirit, or slake the heat
of his furious temper. He rose to the surface spluttering, and when he had wiped the
duckweed out of his eyes the first thing he saw was the fat barge-woman looking back
at him over the stern of the retreating barge and laughing; and he vowed, as he
coughed and choked, to be even with her.
He struck out for the shore, but the cotton gown greatly impeded his efforts, and when
at length he touched land he found it hard to climb up the steep bank unassisted. He
had to take a minute or two’s rest to recover his breath; then, gathering his wet skirts
well over his arms, he started to run after the barge as fast as his legs would carry him,
wild with indignation, thirsting for revenge.
The barge-woman was still laughing when he drew up level with her. ‘Put yourself
through your mangle, washerwoman,’ she called out, ‘and iron your face and crimp it,
and you’ll pass for quite a decent-looking Toad!’ Toad never paused to reply. Solid
revenge was what he wanted, not cheap, windy, verbal triumphs, though he had a
thing or two in his mind that he would have liked to say. He saw what he wanted
ahead of him. Running swiftly on he overtook the horse, unfastened the tow-rope and
cast off, jumped lightly on the horse’s back, and urged it to a gallop by kicking it
vigorously in the sides. He steered for the open country, abandoning the tow-path, and
swinging his steed down a rutty lane. Once he looked back, and saw that the barge had
run aground on the other side of the canal, and the barge-woman was gesticulating
wildly and shouting, ‘Stop, stop, stop!’ ‘I’ve heard that song before,’ said Toad,
laughing, as he continued to spur his steed onward in its wild career.
The barge-horse was not capable of any very sustained effort, and its gallop soon
subsided into a trot, and its trot into an easy walk; but Toad was quite contented with
this, knowing that he, at any rate, was moving, and the barge was not.
He had quite recovered his temper, now that he had done something he thought really
clever; and he was satisfied to jog along quietly in the sun, steering his horse along by-
ways and bridle-paths, and trying to forget how very long it was since he had had a
square meal, till the canal had been left very far behind him.
He had travelled some miles, his horse and he, and he was feeling drowsy in the hot
sunshine, when the horse stopped, lowered his head, and began to nibble the grass;
and Toad, waking up, just saved himself from falling off by an effort.
He looked about him and found he was on a wide common, dotted with patches of
gorse and bramble as far as he could see. Near him stood a dingy gipsy caravan, and
beside it a man was sitting on a bucket turned upside down, very busy smoking and
staring into the wide world. A fire of sticks was burning near by, and over the fire
hung an iron pot, and out of that pot came forth bubblings and gurglings, and a vague
suggestive steaminess. Also smells- warm, rich, and varied smells- that twined and
twisted and wreathed themselves at last into one complete, voluptuous, perfect smell
that seemed like the very soul of Nature taking form and appearing to her children, a
true Goddess, a mother of solace and comfort. Toad now knew well that he had not
been really hungry before. What he had felt earlier in the day had been a mere trifling
qualm. This was the real thing at last, and no mistake; and it would have to be dealt
with speedily, too, or there would be trouble for somebody or something. He looked
the gipsy over carefully, wondering vaguely whether it would be easier to fight him or
cajole him. So there he sat, and sniffed and sniffed, and looked at the gipsy; and the
gipsy sat and smoked, and looked at him.
Presently the gipsy took his pipe out of his mouth and remarked in a careless way,
‘Want to sell that there horse of yours?’ Toad was completely taken aback. He did not
know that gipsies were very fond of horse-dealing, and never missed an opportunity,
and he had not reflected that caravans were always on the move and took a deal of
drawing. It had not occurred to him to turn the horse into cash, but the gipsy’s
suggestion seemed to smooth the way towards the two things he wanted so badlyready money, and a solid breakfast.
‘What?’ he said, ‘me sell this beautiful young horse of mine? O, no; it’s out of the
question. Who’s going to take the washing home to my customers every week? Besides,
I’m too fond of him, and he simply dotes on me.’ ‘Try and love a donkey,’ suggested
the gipsy. ‘Some people do.’ ‘You don’t seem to see,’ continued Toad, ‘that this fine
horse of mine is a cut above you altogether. He’s a blood horse, he is, partly; not the
part you see, of course- another part.
And he’s been a Prize Hackney, too, in his time- that was the time before you knew
him, but you can still tell it on him at a glance, if you understand anything about
horses. No, it’s not to be thought of for a moment. All the same, how much might you
be disposed to offer me for this beautiful young horse of mine?’ The gipsy looked the
horse over, and then he looked Toad over with equal care, and looked at the horse
again. ‘Shillin’ a leg,’ he said briefly, and turned away, continuing to smoke and try to
stare the wide world out of countenance.
‘A shilling a leg?’ cried Toad. ‘If you please, I must take a little time to work that out,
and see just what it comes to.’ He climbed down off his horse, and left it to graze, and
sat down by the gipsy, and did sums on his fingers, and at last he said, ‘A shilling a
leg? Why, that comes to exactly four shillings, and no more. O, no; I could not think of
accepting four shillings for this beautiful young horse of mine.’ ‘Well,’ said the gipsy,
‘I’ll tell you what I will do. I’ll make it five shillings, and that’s three-and-sixpence
more than the animal’s worth. And that’s my last word.’ Then Toad sat and pondered
long and deeply. For he was hungry and quite penniless, and still some way- he knew
not how far- from home, and enemies might still be looking for him. To one in such a
situation, five shillings may very well appear a large sum of money. On the other hand,
it did not seem very much to get for a horse. But then, again, the horse hadn’t cost him
anything; so whatever he got was all clear profit. At last he said firmly, ‘Look here,
gipsy! I tell you what we will do; and this is my last word. You shall hand me over six
shillings and sixpence, cash down; and further, in addition thereto, you shall give me
as much breakfast as I can possibly eat, at one sitting of course, out of that iron pot of
yours that keeps sending forth such delicious and exciting smells. In return, I will make
over to you my spirited young horse, with all the beautiful harness and trappings that
are on him, freely thrown in. If that’s not good enough for you, say so, and I’ll be
getting on. I know a man near here who’s wanted this horse of mine for years.’ The
gipsy grumbled frightfully, and declared if he did a few more deals of that sort he’d be
ruined. But in the end he lugged a dirty canvas bag out of the depths of his trouser
pocket, and counted out six shillings and sixpence into Toad’s paw. Then he
disappeared into the caravan for an instant, and returned with a large iron plate and a
knife, fork, and spoon. He tilted up the pot, and a glorious stream of hot rich stew
gurgled into the plate. It was, indeed, the most beautiful stew in the world, being made
of partridges, and pheasants, and chickens, and hares, and rabbits, and pea-hens, and
guinea-fowls, and one or two other things. Toad took the plate on his lap, almost
crying, and stuffed, and stuffed, and stuffed, and kept asking for more, and the gipsy
never grudged it him. He thought that he had never eaten so good a breakfast in all his
life.
When Toad had taken as much stew on board as he thought he could possibly hold, he
got up and said good-bye to the gipsy, and took an affectionate farewell of the horse;
and the gipsy, who knew the riverside well, gave him directions which way to go, and
he set forth on his travels again in the best possible spirits.
He was, indeed, a very different Toad from the animal of an hour ago. The sun was
shining brightly, his wet clothes were quite dry again, he had money in his pocket once
more, he was nearing home and friends and safety, and, most and best of all, he had
had a substantial meal, hot and nourishing, and felt big, and strong, and careless, and
self-confident.
As he tramped along gaily, he thought of his adventures and escapes, and how when
things seemed at their worst he had always managed to find a way out; and his pride
and conceit began to swell within him. ‘Ho, ho!’ he said to himself as he marched along
with his chin in the air, ‘what a clever Toad I am! There is surely no animal equal to me
for cleverness in the whole world! My enemies shut me up in prison, encircled by
sentries, watched night and day by warders; I walk out through them all, by sheer
ability coupled with courage. They pursue me with engines, and policemen, and
revolvers; I snap my fingers at them, and vanish, laughing, into space. I am,
unfortunately, thrown into a canal by a woman fat of body and very evil-minded. What
of it? I swim ashore, I seize her horse, I ride off in triumph, and I sell the horse for a
whole pocketful of money and an excellent breakfast! Ho, ho! I am The Toad, the
handsome, the popular, the successful Toad!’ He got so puffed up with conceit that he
made up a song as he walked in praise of himself, and sang it at the top of his voice,
though there was no one to hear it but him. It was perhaps the most conceited song that
any animal ever composed.
‘The world has held great Heroes, As history-books have showed; But never a name to
go down to fame Compared with that of Toad!
‘The clever men at Oxford Know all that there is to be knowed.
But they none of them know one half as much As intelligent Mr. Toad!
‘The animals sat in the Ark and cried, Their tears in torrents flowed.
Who was it said, “There’s land ahead?” Encouraging Mr. Toad!
‘The army all saluted As they marched along the road.
Was it the King? Or Kitchener? No. It was Mr. Toad.
‘The Queen and her Ladies-in-waiting Sat at the window and sewed.
She cried, “Look! who’s that handsome man?” They answered, “Mr. Toad.”’
0h there was a great deal more of the same sort, but too dreadfully conceited to be
written down. These are some of the milder verses.
He sang as he walked, and he walked as he sang, and got more inflated every minute.
But his pride was shortly to have a severe fall.
After some miles of country lanes he reached the high road, and as he turned into it
and glanced along its white length, he saw approaching him a speck that turned into a
dot and then into a blob, and then into something very familiar; and a double note of
warning, only too well known, fell on his delighted ear.
‘This is something like!’ said the excited Toad. ‘This is real life again, this is once more
the great world from which I have been missed so long! I will hail them, my brothers of
the wheel, and pitch them a yarn, of the sort that has been so successful hitherto; and
they will give me a lift, of course, and then I will talk to them some more; and, perhaps,
with luck, it may even end in my driving up to Toad Hall in a motor-car! That will be
one in the eye for Badger!’ He stepped confidently out into the road to hail the motorcar, which came along at an easy pace, slowing down as it neared the lane; when
suddenly he became very pale, his heart turned to water, his knees shook and yielded
under him, and he doubled up and collapsed with a sickening pain in his interior. And
well he might, the unhappy animal; for the approaching car was the very one he had
stolen out of the yard of the Red Lion Hotel on that fatal day when all his troubles
began! And the people in it were the very same people he had sat and watched at
luncheon in the coffee-room!
He sank down in a shabby, miserable heap in the road, murmuring to himself in his
despair, ‘It’s all up! It’s all over now! Chains and policemen again! Prison again! Dry
bread and water again! O, what a fool I have been! What did I want to go strutting
about the country for, singing conceited songs, and hailing people in broad day on the
high road, instead of hiding till nightfall and slipping home quietly by back ways! O
hapless Toad! O ill-fated animal!’ The terrible motor-car drew slowly nearer and
nearer, till at last he heard it stop just short of him. Two gentlemen got out and walked
round the trembling heap of crumpled misery lying in the road, and one of them said,
‘O dear! this is very sad! Here is a poor old thing- a washerwoman apparently- who has
fainted in the road! Perhaps she is overcome by the heat, poor creature; or possibly she
has not had any food to-day. Let us lift her into the car and take her to the nearest
village, where doubtless she has friends.’ They tenderly lifted Toad into the motor-car
and propped him up with soft cushions, and proceeded on their way.
When Toad heard them talk in so kind and sympathetic a way, and knew that he was
not recognised, his courage began to revive, and he cautiously opened first one eye and
then the other.
‘Look!’ said one of the gentlemen, ‘she is better already. The fresh air is doing her good.
How do you feel now, ma’am?’ ‘Thank you kindly, Sir,’ said Toad in a feeble voice,
‘I’m feeling a great deal better!’ ‘That’s right,’ said the gentleman. ‘Now keep quite still,
and, above all, don’t try to talk.’
‘I won’t,’ said Toad. ‘I was only thinking, if I might sit on the front seat there, beside the
driver, where I could get the fresh air full in my face, I should soon be all right again.’
‘What a very sensible woman!’ said the gentleman. ‘Of course you shall.’ So they
carefully helped Toad into the front seat beside the driver, and on they went again.
Toad was almost himself again by now. He sat up, looked about him, and tried to beat
down the tremors, the yearnings, the old cravings that rose up and beset him and took
possession of him entirely.
‘It is fate!’ he said to himself. ‘Why strive? why struggle?’ and he turned to the driver at
his side.
‘Please, Sir,’ he said, ‘I wish you would kindly let me try and drive the car for a little.
I’ve been watching you carefully, and it looks so easy and so interesting, and I should
like to be able to tell my friends that once I had driven a motor-car!’ The driver laughed
at the proposal, so heartily that the gentleman inquired what the matter was. When he
heard, he said, to Toad’s delight, ‘Bravo, ma’am! I like your spirit. Let her have a try,
and look after her. She won’t do any harm.’ Toad eagerly scrambled into the seat
vacated by the driver, took the steeringwheel in his hands, listened with affected
humility to the instructions given him, and set the car in motion, but very slowly and
carefully at first, for he was determined to be prudent.
The gentlemen behind clapped their hands and applauded, and Toad heard them
saying, ‘How well she does it! Fancy a washerwoman driving a car as well as that, the
first time!’ Toad went a little faster; then faster still, and faster.
He heard the gentlemen call out warningly, ‘Be careful, washerwoman!’ And this
annoyed him, and he began to lose his head.
The driver tried to interfere, but he pinned him down in his seat with one elbow, and
put on full speed. The rush of air in his face, the hum of the engines, and the light jump
of the car beneath him intoxicated his weak brain. ‘Washerwoman, indeed!’ he shouted
recklessly. ‘Ho! ho! I am the Toad, the motor-car snatcher, the prison-breaker, the Toad
who always escapes! Sit still, and you shall know what driving really is, for you are in
the hands of the famous, the skilful, the entirely fearless Toad!’ With a cry of horror the
whole party rose and flung themselves on him. ‘Seize him!’ they cried, ‘seize the Toad,
the wicked animal who stole our motor-car! Bind him, chain him, drag him to the
nearest police-station! Down with the desperate and dangerous Toad!’ Alas! they
should have thought, they ought to have been more prudent, they should have
remembered to stop the motor-car somehow before playing any pranks of that sort.
With a half-turn of the wheel the Toad sent the car crashing through the low hedge that
ran along the roadside. One mighty bound, a violent shock, and the wheels of the car
were churning up the thick mud of a horse-pond.
Toad found himself flying through the air with the strong upward rush and delicate
curve of a swallow. He liked the motion, and was just beginning to wonder whether it
would go on until he developed wings and turned into a Toad-bird, when he landed
on his back with a thump, in the soft rich grass of a meadow. Sitting up, he could just
see the motor-car in the pond, nearly submerged; the gentlemen and the driver,
encumbered by their long coats, were floundering helplessly in the water.
He picked himself up rapidly, and set off running across country as hard as he could,
scrambling through hedges, jumping ditches, pounding across fields, till he was
breathless and weary, and had to settle down into an easy walk. When he had
recovered his breath somewhat, and was able to think calmly, he began to giggle, and
from giggling he took to laughing, and he laughed till he had to sit down under a
hedge. ‘Ho, ho!’ he cried, in ecstasies of self-admiration, ‘Toad again! Toad, as usual,
comes out on the top! Who was it got them to give him a lift? Who managed to get on
the front seat for the sake of fresh air? Who persuaded them into letting him see if he
could drive? Who landed them all in a horse-pond? Who escaped, flying gaily and
unscathed through the air, leaving the narrow-minded, grudging, timid excursionists
in the mud where they should rightly be? Why, Toad, of course; clever Toad, great
Toad, good Toad!’
Then he burst into song again, and chanted with uplifted voice: ‘The motor-car went
Poop-poop-poop, As it raced along the road.
Who was it steered it into a pond? Ingenious Mr. Toad!
O, how clever I am! How clever, how clever, how very clev-’ A slight noise at a
distance behind him made him turn his head and look. O horror! O misery! O despair!
About two fields off, a chauffeur in his leather gaiters and two large rural policemen
were visible, running towards him as hard as they could go!
Poor Toad sprang to his feet and pelted away again, his heart in his mouth.
‘O, my!’ he gasped, as he panted along, ‘what an ass I am! What a conceited and
heedless ass! Swaggering again! Shouting and singing songs again! Sitting still and
gassing again! O my! O my! O my!’ He glanced back, and saw to his dismay that they
were gaining on him. On he ran desperately, but kept looking back, and saw that they
still gained steadily. He did his best, but he was a fat animal, and his legs were short,
and still they gained.
He could hear them close behind him now. Ceasing to heed where he was going, he
struggled on blindly and wildly, looking back over his shoulder at the now triumphant
enemy, when suddenly the earth failed under his feet, he grasped at the air, and,
splash! he found himself head over ears in deep water, rapid water, water that bore
him along with a force he could not contend with; and he knew that in his blind panic
he had run straight into the river!
He rose to the surface and tried to grasp the reeds and the rushes that grew along the
water’s edge close under the bank, but the stream was so strong that it tore them out of
his hands. ‘O my!’ gasped poor Toad, ‘if ever I steal a motor-car again! If ever I sing
another conceited song’- then down he went, and came up breathless and spluttering.
Presently he saw that he was approaching a big dark hole in the bank, just above his
head, and as the stream bore him past he reached up with a paw and caught hold of the
edge and held on. Then slowly and with difficulty he drew himself up out of the water,
till at last he was able to rest his elbows on the edge of the hole. There he remained for
some minutes, puffing and panting, for he was quite exhausted.
As he sighed and blew and stared before him into the dark hole, some bright small
thing shone and twinkled in its depths, moving towards him. As it approached, a face
grew up gradually around it, and it was a familiar face!
Brown and small, with whiskers.
Grave and round, with neat ears and silky hair.
It was the Water Rat!
THE Rat put out a neat little brown paw, gripped Toad firmly by the scruff of the neck,
and gave a great hoist and a pull; and the water-logged Toad came up slowly but
surely over the edge of the hole, till at last he stood safe and sound in the hall, streaked
with mud and weed to be sure, and with the water streaming off him, but happy and
high-spirited as of old, now that he found himself once more in the house of a friend,
and dodgings and evasions were over, and he could lay aside a disguise that was
unworthy of his position and wanted such a lot of living up to.
‘O, Ratty!’ he cried. ‘I’ve been through such times since I saw you last, you can’t think!
Such trials, such sufferings, and all so nobly borne! Then such escapes, such disguises
such subterfuges, and all so cleverly planned and carried out! Been in prison- got out of
it, of course! Been thrown into a canal- swam ashore! Stole a horse- sold him for a large
sum of money! Humbugged everybodymade ‘em all do exactly what I wanted! Oh, I
am a smart Toad, and no mistake! What do you think my last exploit was? Just hold on
till I tell you-’ ‘Toad,’ said the Water Rat, gravely and firmly, ‘you go off upstairs at
once, and take off that old cotton rag that looks as if it might formerly have belonged to
some washerwoman, and clean yourself thoroughly, and put on some of my clothes,
and try and come down looking like a gentleman if you can; for a more shabby,
bedraggled, disreputable-looking object than you are I never set eyes on in my whole
life! Now, stop swaggering and arguing, and be off! I’ll have something to say to you
later!’ Toad was at first inclined to stop and do some talking back at him. He had had
enough of being ordered about when he was in prison, and here was the thing being
begun all over again, apparently; and by a Rat, too! However, he caught sight of
himself in the looking-glass over the hat-stand, with the rusty black bonnet perched
rakishly over one eye, and he changed his mind and went very quickly and humbly
upstairs to the Rat’s dressing-room. There he had a thorough wash and brush-up,
changed his clothes, and stood for a long time before the glass, contemplating himself
with pride and pleasure, and thinking what utter idiots all the people must have been
to have ever mistaken him for one moment for a washerwoman.
By the time he came down again luncheon was on the table, and very glad Toad was to
see it, for he had been through some trying experiences and had taken much hard
exercise since the excellent breakfast provided for him by the gipsy. While they ate
Toad told the Rat all his adventures, dwelling chiefly on his own cleverness, and
presence of mind in emergencies, and cunning in tight places; and rather making out
that he had been having a gay and highly-coloured experience. But the more he talked
and boasted, the more grave and silent the Rat became.
When at last Toad had talked himself to a standstill, there was silence for a while; and
then the Rat said, ‘Now, Toady, I don’t want to give you pain, after all you’ve been
through already; but, seriously, don’t you see what an awful ass you’ve been making of
yourself? On your own admission you have been handcuffed, imprisoned, starved,
chased, terrified out of your life, insulted, jeered at, and ignominiously flung into the
water- by a woman, too! Where’s the amusement in that? Where does the fun come in?
And all because you must needs go and steal a motor-car. You know that you’ve never
had anything but trouble from motor-cars from the moment you first set eyes on one.
But if you will be mixed up with them- as you generally are, five minutes after you’ve
started- why steal them? Be a cripple, if you think it’s exciting; be a bankrupt, for a
change, if you’ve set your mind on it: but why choose to be a convict? When are you
going to be sensible, and think of your friends, and try and be a credit to them? Do you
suppose it’s any pleasure to me, for instance, to hear animals saying, as I go about, that
I’m the chap that keeps company with gaol-birds?’ Now, it was a very comforting point
in Toad’s character that he was a thoroughly good-hearted animal, and never minded
being jawed by those who were his real friends. And even when most set upon a thing,
he was always able to see the other side of the question. So although, while the Rat was
talking so seriously, he kept saying to himself mutinously, ‘But it was fun, though!
Awful fun!’ and making strange suppressed noises inside him, k-i-ck-ck-ck, and poopp-p, and other sounds resembling stifled snorts, or the opening of soda-water bottles,
yet when the Rat had quite finished, he heaved a deep sigh and said, very nicely and
humbly, ‘Quite right, Ratty! How sound you always are! Yes, I’ve been a conceited old
ass, I can quite see that; but now I’m going to be a good Toad, and not do it any more.
As for motor-cars, I’ve not been at all so keen about them since my last ducking in that
river of yours. The fact is, while I was hanging on to the edge of your hole and getting
my breath, I had a sudden idea- a really brilliant idea- connected with motor-boatsthere, there! don’t take on so, old chap, and stamp, and upset things; it was only an
idea, and we won’t talk any more about it now. We’ll have our coffee, and a smoke,
and a quiet chat, and then I’m going to stroll quietly down to Toad Hall, and get into
clothes of my own, and set things going again on the old lines. I’ve had enough of
adventures. I shall lead a quiet, steady, respectable life, pottering about my property,
and improving it, and doing a little landscape gardening at times. There will always be
a bit of dinner for my friends when they come to see me; and I shall keep a pony-chaise
to jog about the country in, just as I used to in the good old days, before I got restless,
and wanted to do things.’ ‘Stroll quietly down to Toad Hall?’ cried the Rat, greatly
excited. ‘What are you talking about? Do you mean to say you haven’t heard?’ ‘Heard
what?’ said Toad, turning rather pale. ‘Go on, Ratty! Quick! Don’t spare me! What
haven’t I heard?’
‘Do you mean to tell me,’ shouted the Rat, thumping with his little fist upon the table,
‘that you’ve heard nothing about the Stoats and Weasels?’ ‘What, the Wild Wooders?’
cried Toad, trembling in every limb. ‘No, not a word! What have they been doing?’ ‘-
And how they’ve been and taken Toad Hall?’ continued the Rat.
Toad leaned his elbows on the table, and his chin on his paws; and a large tear welled
up in each of his eyes, overflowed and splashed on the table, plop! plop!
‘Go on, Ratty,’ he murmured presently; ‘tell me all. The worst is over. I am an animal
again. I can bear it.’ ‘When you- got- into that- that- trouble of yours,’ said the Rat,
slowly and impressively; ‘I mean, when you- disappeared from society for a time, over
that misunderstanding about a- a machine, you know’ Toad merely nodded.
‘Well, it was a good deal talked about down here, naturally,’ continued the Rat, ‘not
only along the river-side, but even in the Wild Wood. Animals took sides, as always
happens. The River-bankers stuck up for you, and said you had been infamously
treated, and there was no justice to be had in the land nowadays.
But the Wild Wood animals said hard things, and served you right, and it was time this
sort of thing was stopped. And they got very cocky, and went about saying you were
done for this time! You would never come back again, never, never!’
Toad nodded once more, keeping silence.
‘That’s the sort of little beasts they are,’ the Rat went on. ‘But Mole and Badger, they
stuck out, through thick and thin, that you would come back again soon, somehow.
They didn’t know exactly how, but somehow!’ Toad began to sit up in his chair again,
and to smirk a little.
‘They argued from history,’ continued the Rat. ‘They said that no criminal laws had
ever been known to prevail against cheek and plausibility such as yours, combined
with the power of a long purse. So they arranged to move their things in to Toad Hall,
and sleep there, and keep it aired, and have it all ready for you when you turned up.
They didn’t guess what was going to happen, of course; still, they had their suspicions
of the Wild Wood animals. Now I come to the most painful and tragic part of my story.
One dark night- it was a very dark night, and blowing hard, too, and raining simply
cats and dogs- a band of weasels, armed to the teeth, crept silently up the carriagedrive to the front entrance. Simultaneously, a body of desperate ferrets, advancing
through the kitchen-garden, possessed themselves of the backyard and offices; while a
company of skirmishing stoats who stuck at nothing occupied the conservatory and the
billiard-room, and held the French windows opening on to the lawn.
‘The Mole and the Badger were sitting by the fire in the smoking-room, telling stories
and suspecting nothing, for it wasn’t a night for any animals to be out in, when those
bloodthirsty villains broke down the doors and rushed in upon them from every side.
They made the best fight they could, but what was the good? They were unarmed, and
taken by surprise, and what can two animals do against hundreds? They took and beat
them severely with sticks, those two poor faithful creatures, and turned them out into
the cold and the wet, with many insulting and uncalled-for remarks!’ Here the
unfeeling Toad broke into a snigger, and then pulled himself together and tried to look
particularly solemn.
‘And the Wild Wooders have been living in Toad Hall ever since,’ continued the Rat;
‘and going on simply anyhow! Lying in bed half the day, and breakfast at all hours,
and the place in such a mess (I’m told) it’s not fit to be seen! Eating your grub, and
drinking your drink, and making bad jokes about you, and singing vulgar songs,
about- well, about prisons and magistrates, and policemen; horrid personal songs, with
no humour in them. And they’re telling the tradespeople and everybody that they’ve
come to stay for good.’ ‘O, have they!’ said Toad getting up and seizing a stick. ‘I’ll jolly
soon see about that!’ ‘It’s no good, Toad!’ called the Rat after him. ‘You’d better come
back and sit down; you’ll only get into trouble.’ But the Toad was off, and there was no
holding him. He marched rapidly down the road, his stick over his shoulder, fuming
and muttering to himself in his anger, till he got near his front gate, when suddenly
there popped up from behind the palings a long yellow ferret with a gun.
‘Who comes there?’ said the ferret sharply.
‘Stuff and nonsense!’ said Toad, very angrily.
‘What do you mean by talking like that to me?’ ‘Come out of that at once, or I’ll-’ The
ferret said never a word, but he brought his gun up to his shoulder. Toad prudently
dropped flat in the road, and Bang! a bullet whistled over his head.
The startled Toad scrambled to his feet and scampered off down the road as hard as he
could; and as he ran he heard the ferret laughing and other horrid thin little laughs
taking it up and carrying on the sound.
He went back, very crestfallen, and told the Water Rat.
‘What did I tell you?’ said the Rat. ‘It’s no good. They’ve got sentries posted, and they
are all armed. You must just wait.’ Still, Toad was not inclined to give in all at once. So
he got out the boat, and set off rowing up the river to where the garden front of Toad
Hall came down to the waterside.
Arriving within sight of his old home, he rested on his oars and surveyed the land
cautiously. All seemed very peaceful and deserted and quiet. He could see the whole
front of Toad Hall, glowing in the evening sunshine, the pigeons settling by twos and
threes along the straight line of the roof; the garden, a blaze of flowers; the creek that
led up to the boat-house, the little wooden bridge that crossed it; all tranquil,
uninhabited, apparently waiting for his return. He would try the boat-house first, he
thought. Very warily he paddled up to the mouth of the creek, and was just passing
under the bridge, when... Crash!
A great stone, dropped from above, smashed through the bottom of the boat.
It filled and sank, and Toad found himself struggling in deep water. Looking up, he
saw two stoats leaning over the parapet of the bridge and watching him with great
glee. ‘It will be your head next time, Toady!’ they called out to him. The indignant Toad
swam to shore, while the stoats laughed and laughed, supporting each other, and
laughed again, till they nearly had two fits- that is, one fit each, of course.
The Toad retraced his weary way on foot, and related his disappointing experiences to
the Water Rat once more.
‘Well, what did I tell you?’ said the Rat very crossly. ‘And, now, look here! See what
you’ve been and done! Lost me my boat that I was so fond of, that’s what you’ve done!
And simply ruined that nice suit of clothes that I lent you! Really, Toad, of all the trying
animals- I wonder you manage to keep any friends at all!’ The Toad saw at once how
wrongly and foolishly he had acted. He admitted his errors and wrong-headedness and
made a full apology to Rat for losing his boat and spoiling his clothes. And he wound
up by saying, with that frank selfsurrender which always disarmed his friend’s
criticism and won them back to his side, ‘Ratty! I see that I have been a headstrong and
a wilful Toad! Henceforth, believe me, I will be humble and submissive, and will take
no action without your kind advice and full approval!’ ‘If that is really so,’ said the
good-natured Rat, already appeased, ‘then my advice to you is, considering the lateness
of the hour, to sit down and have your supper, which will be on the table in a minute,
and be very patient. For I am convinced that we can do nothing until we have seen the
Mole and the Badger, and heard their latest news, and held conference and taken their
advice in this difficult matter.’ ‘Oh, ah, yes, of course, the Mole and the Badger,’ said
Toad, lightly. ‘What’s become of them, the dear fellows? I had forgotten all about
them.’ ‘Well may you ask!’ said the Rat reproachfully. ‘While you were riding about the
country in expensive motor-cars, and galloping proudly on blood-horses, and
breakfasting on the fat of the land, those two poor devoted animals have been camping
out in the open, in every sort of weather, living very rough by day and lying very hard
by night; watching over your house, patrolling your boundaries, keeping a constant eye
on the stoats and the weasels, scheming and planning and contriving how to get your
property back for you. You don’t deserve to have such true and loyal friends, Toad,
you don’t, really. Some day, when it’s too late, you’ll be sorry you didn’t value them
more while you had them!’ ‘I’m an ungrateful beast, I know,’ sobbed Toad, shedding
bitter tears. ‘Let me go out and find them, out into the cold, dark night, and share their
hardships, and try and prove by- Hold on a bit! Surely I heard the chink of dishes on a
tray! Supper’s here at last, hooray! Come on, Ratty!’ The Rat remembered that poor
Toad had been on prison fare for a considerable time, and that large allowances had
therefore to be made. He followed him to the table accordingly, and hospitably
encouraged him in his gallant efforts to make up for past privations.
They had just finished their meal and resumed their arm-chairs, when there came a
heavy knock at the door.
Toad was nervous, but the Rat, nodding mysteriously at him, went straight up to the
door and opened it, and in walked Mr. Badger.
He had all the appearance of one who for some nights had been kept away from home
and all its little comforts and conveniences. His shoes were covered with mud, and he
was looking very rough and touzled; but then he had never been a very smart man, the
Badger, at the best of times. He came solemnly up to Toad, shook him by the paw, and
said, ‘Welcome home, Toad! Alas! what am I saying? Home, indeed! This is a poor
home-coming. Unhappy Toad!’ Then he turned his back on him, sat down to the table,
drew his chair up, and helped himself to a large slice of cold pie.
Toad was quite alarmed at this very serious and portentous style of greeting; but the
Rat whispered to him, ‘Never mind; don’t take any notice; and don’t say anything to
him just yet. He’s always rather low and despondent when he’s wanting his victuals. In
half an hour’s time he’ll be quite a different animal.’ So they waited in silence, and
presently there came another and a lighter knock. The Rat, with a nod to Toad, went to
the door and ushered in the Mole, very shabby and unwashed, with bits of hay and
straw sticking in his fur.
‘Hooray! Here’s old Toad!’ cried the Mole, his face beaming. ‘Fancy having you back
again!’ And he began to dance round him. ‘We never dreamt you would turn up so
soon! Why, you must have managed to escape, you clever, ingenious, intelligent Toad!’
The Rat, alarmed, pulled him by the elbow; but it was too late.
Toad was puffing and swelling already.
‘Clever? O, no!’ he said. ‘I’m not really clever, according to my friends. I’ve only broken
out of the strongest prison in England, that’s all! And captured a railway train and
escaped on it, that’s all! And disguised myself and gone about the country humbugging
everybody, that’s all! O, no! I’m a stupid ass, I am! I’ll tell you one or two of my little
adventures, Mole, and you shall judge for yourself!’ ‘Well, well,’ said the Mole, moving
towards the supper-table; ‘supposing you talk while I eat. Not a bite since breakfast! O
my! O my!’ And he sat down and helped himself liberally to cold beef and pickles.
Toad straddled on the hearth-rug, thrust his paw into his trouser-pocket and pulled out
a handful of silver. ‘Look at that!’ he cried, displaying it. ‘That’s not so bad, is it, for a
few minutes’ work? And how do you think I done it, Mole? Horsedealing! That’s how I
done it!’
‘Go on, Toad,’ said the Mole, immensely interested.
‘Toad, do be quiet, please!’ said the Rat. ‘And don’t you egg him on, Mole, when you
know what he is; but please tell us as soon as possible what the position is, and what’s
best to be done, now that Toad is back at last.’ ‘The position’s about as bad as it can be,’
replied the Mole grumpily; ‘and as for what’s to be done, why, blest if I know! The
Badger and I have been round and round the place, by night and by day; always the
same thing. Sentries posted everywhere, guns poked out at us, stones thrown at us;
always an animal on the look-out, and when they see us, my! how they do laugh!
That’s what annoys me most!’ ‘It’s a very difficult situation,’ said the Rat, reflecting
deeply. ‘But I think I see now, in the depths of my mind, what Toad really ought to do.
I will tell you.
He ought to-’ ‘No, he oughtn’t!’ shouted the Mole, with his mouth full. ‘Nothing of the
sort! You don’t understand. What he ought to do is, he ought to-’ ‘Well, I shan’t do it,
anyway!’ cried Toad, getting excited. ‘I’m not going to be ordered about by you
fellows! It’s my house we’re talking about, and I know exactly what to do, and I’ll tell
you. I’m going to-’ By this time they were all three talking at once, at the top of their
voices, and the noise was simply deafening, when a thin, dry voice made itself heard,
saying, ‘Be quiet at once, all of you!’ and instantly every one was silent.
It was the Badger, who, having finished his pie, had turned round in his chair and was
looking at them severely. When he saw that he had secured their attention, and that
they were evidently waiting for him to address them, he turned back to the table again
and reached out for the cheese. And so great was the respect commanded by the solid
qualities of that admirable animal, that not another word was uttered until he had quite
finished his repast and brushed the crumbs from his knees. The Toad fidgeted a good
deal, but the Rat held him firmly down.
When the Badger had quite done, he got up from his seat and stood before the
fireplace, reflecting deeply. At last he spoke.
‘Toad!’ he said severely. ‘You bad, troublesome little animal! Aren’t you ashamed of
yourself? What do you think your father, my old friend, would have said if he had
been here to-night, and had known of all your goings on?’ Toad, who was on the sofa
by this time, with his legs up, rolled over on his face, shaken by sobs of contrition.
‘There, there!’ went on the Badger, more kindly. ‘Never mind. Stop crying.
We’re going to let bygones be bygones, and try and turn over a new leaf. But what the
Mole says is quite true. The stoats are on guard, at every point, and they make the best
sentinels in the world. It’s quite useless to think of attacking the place. They’re too
strong for us.’ ‘Then it’s all over,’ sobbed the Toad, crying into the sofa cushions. ‘I
shall go and enlist for a soldier, and never see my dear Toad Hall any more!’
‘Come, cheer up, Toady!’ said the Badger. ‘There are more ways of getting back a place
than taking it by storm. I haven’t said my last word yet. Now I’m going to tell you a
great secret.’ Toad sat up slowly and dried his eyes. Secrets had an immense attraction
for him, because he never could keep one, and he enjoyed the sort of unhallowed thrill
he experienced when he went and told another animal, after having faithfully
promised not to.
‘There- is- an- underground- passage,’ said the Badger, impressively, ‘that leads from
the river-bank, quite near here, right up into the middle of Toad Hall.’ ‘O, nonsense!
Badger,’ said Toad, rather airily. ‘You’ve been listening to some of the yarns they spin
in the public-houses about here. I know every inch of Toad Hall, inside and out.
Nothing of the sort, I do assure you!’ ‘My young friend,’ said the Badger, with great
severity, ‘your father, who was a worthy animal- a lot worthier than some others I
know- was a particular friend of mine, and told me a great deal he wouldn’t have
dreamt of telling you. He discovered that passage- he didn’t make it, of course; that
was done hundreds of years before he ever came to live there- and he repaired it and
cleaned it out, because he thought it might come in useful some day, in case of trouble
or danger; and he showed it to me. “Don’t let my son know about it,” he said. “He’s a
good boy, but very light and volatile in character, and simply cannot hold his tongue. If
he’s ever in a real fix, and it would be of use to him, you may tell him about the secret
passage; but not before.”’
The other animals looked hard at Toad to see how he would take it. Toad was inclined
to be sulky at first; but he brightened up immediately, like the good fellow he was.
‘Well, well,’ he said; ‘perhaps I am a bit of a talker. A popular fellow such as I am- my
friends get round me- we chaff, we sparkle, we tell witty stories- and somehow my
tongue gets wagging. I have the gift of conversation. I’ve been told I ought to have a
salon, whatever that may be. Never mind. Go on, Badger. How’s this passage of yours
going to help us?’ ‘I’ve found out a thing or two lately,’ continued the Badger. ‘I got
Otter to disguise himself as a sweep and call at the back-door with brushes over his
shoulder, asking for a job. There’s going to be a big banquet to-morrow night. It’s
somebody’s birthday- the Chief Weasel’s, I believe- and all the weasels will be gathered
together in the dining-hall, eating and drinking and laughing and carrying on,
suspecting nothing. No guns, no swords, no sticks, no arms of any sort whatever!’ ‘But
the sentinels will be posted as usual,’ remarked the Rat.
‘Exactly,’ said the Badger; ‘that is my point. The weasels will trust entirely to their
excellent sentinels. And that is where the passage comes in. That very useful tunnel
leads right up under the butler’s pantry, next to the dining-hall!’ ‘Aha! that squeaky
board in the butler’s pantry!’ said Toad. ‘Now I understand it!’
‘We shall creep out quietly into the butler’s pantry-’ cried the Mole.
‘-with our pistols and swords and sticks-’ shouted the Rat.
‘-and rush in upon them,’ said the Badger.
‘-and whack ‘em, and whack ‘em, and whack ‘em!’ cried the Toad in ecstasy, running
round and round the room, and jumping over the chairs.
‘Very well, then,’ said the Badger, resuming his usual dry manner, ‘our plan is settled,
and there’s nothing more for you to argue and squabble about. So, as it’s getting very
late, all of you go right off to bed at once. We will make all the necessary arrangements
in the course of the morning to-morrow.’ Toad, of course, went off to bed dutifully with
the rest- he knew better than to refuse- though he was feeling much too excited to sleep.
But he had had a long day, with many events crowded into it; and sheets and blankets
were very friendly and comforting things, after plain straw, and not too much of it,
spread on the stone floor of a draughty cell; and his head had not been many seconds
on his pillow before he was snoring happily. Naturally, he dreamt a good deal; about
roads that ran away from him just when he wanted them, and canals that chased him
and caught him, and a barge that sailed into the banqueting-hall with his week’s
washing, just as he was giving a dinner-party; and he was alone in the secret passage,
pushing onwards, but it twisted and turned round and shook itself, and sat up on its
end; yet somehow, at the last, he found himself back in Toad Hall, safe and triumphant,
with all his friends gathered round about him, earnestly assuring him that he really
was a clever Toad.
He slept till a late hour next morning, and by the time he got down he found that the
other animals had finished their breakfast some time before. The Mole had slipped off
somewhere by himself, without telling any one where he was going to. The Badger sat
in the arm-chair, reading the paper, and not concerning himself in the slightest about
what was going to happen that very evening. The Rat, on the other hand, was running
round the room busily, with his arms full of weapons of every kind, distributing them
in four little heaps on the floor, and saying excitedly under his breath, as he ran,
‘Here’s-a-sword-for-the-Rat, here’s-asword-for-the-Mole, here’s-a-sword-for-the-Toad,
here’s-a-sword-for-the-Badger! Here’s-a-pistol-for-the-Rat, here’s-a-pistol-for-the-Mole,
here’s-a-pistol-for-theToad, here’s-a-pistol-for-the-Badger!’ And so on, in a regular,
rhythmical way, while the four little heaps gradually grew and grew.
‘That’s all very well, Rat,’ said the Badger presently, looking at the busy little animal
over the edge of his newspaper; ‘I’m not blaming you. But just let us once get past the
stoats, with those detestable guns of theirs, and I assure you we shan’t want any
swords or pistols. We four, with our sticks, once we’re inside the dininghall, why, we
shall clear the floor of all the lot of them in five minutes. I’d have done the whole thing
by myself, only I didn’t want to deprive you fellows of the fun!’
‘It’s as well to be on the safe side,’ said the Rat reflectively, polishing a pistolbarrel on
his sleeve and looking along it.
The Toad, having finished his breakfast, picked up a stout stick and swung it
vigorously, belabouring imaginary animals. ‘I’ll learn ‘em to steal my house!’ he cried.
‘I’ll learn ‘em, I’ll learn ‘em!’ ‘Don’t say “learn ‘em,” Toad,’ said the Rat, greatly
shocked. ‘It’s not good English.’ ‘What are you always nagging at Toad for?’ inquired
the Badger, rather peevishly. ‘What’s the matter with his English? It’s the same what I
use myself, and if it’s good enough for me, it ought to be good enough for you!’ ‘I’m
very sorry,’ said the Rat humbly. ‘Only I think it ought to be “teach ‘em,” not “learn
‘em.”’ ‘But we don’t want to teach ‘em,’ replied the Badger. ‘We want to learn ‘emlearn
‘em, learn ‘em! And what’s more, we’re going to do it, too!’ ‘Oh, very well, have it your
own way,’ said the Rat. He was getting rather muddled about it himself, and presently
he retired into a corner, where he could be heard muttering, ‘Learn ‘em, teach ‘em,
teach ‘em, learn ‘em!’ till the Badger told him rather sharply to leave off.
Presently the Mole came tumbling into the room, evidently very pleased with himself.
‘I’ve been having such fun!’ he began at once; ‘I’ve been getting a rise out of the stoats!’
‘I hope you’ve been very careful, Mole?’ said the Rat anxiously.
‘I should hope so, too,’ said the Mole confidently. ‘I got the idea when I went into the
kitchen, to see about Toad’s breakfast being kept hot for him. I found that old
washerwoman-dress that he came home in yesterday, hanging on a towelhorse before
the fire. So I put it on, and the bonnet as well, and the shawl, and off I went to Toad
Hall, as bold as you please. The sentries were on the look-out, of course, with their
guns and their “Who comes there?” and all the rest of their nonsense. “Good morning,
gentlemen!” says I, very respectful. “Want any washing done to-day?” ‘They looked at
me very proud and stiff and haughty, and said, “Go away, washerwoman! We don’t do
any washing on duty.” “Or any other time?” says I.
Ho, ho, ho! Wasn’t I funny, Toad?’ ‘Poor, frivolous animal!’ said Toad, very loftily. The
fact is, he felt exceedingly jealous of Mole for what he had just done. It was exactly
what he would have liked to have done himself, if only he had thought of it first, and
hadn’t gone and overslept himself.
‘Some of the stoats turned quite pink,’ continued the Mole, ‘and the Sergeant in charge,
he said to me, very short, he said, “Now run away, my good woman, run away! Don’t
keep my men idling and talking on their posts.” “Run away?” says I; “it won’t be me
that’ll be running away, in a very short time from now!”’ ‘O Moly, how could you?’
said the Rat, dismayed.
The Badger laid down his paper.
‘I could see them pricking up their ears and looking at each other,’ went on the Mole;
‘and the Sergeant said to them, “Never mind her; she doesn’t know what she’s talking
about.”’ “’O! don’t I?”’ said I. “’Well, let me tell you this. My daughter, she washes for
Mr. Badger, and that’ll show you whether I know what I’m talking about; and you’ll
know pretty soon, too! A hundred bloodthirsty badgers, armed with rifles, are going to
attack Toad Hall this very night, by way of the paddock. Six boatloads of Rats, with
pistols and cutlasses, will come up the river and effect a landing in the garden; while a
picked body of Toads, known as the Die-hards, or the Death-or-Glory Toads, will storm
the orchard and carry everything before them, yelling for vengeance. There won’t be
much left of you to wash, by the time they’ve done with you, unless you clear out while
you have the chance!” Then I ran away, and when I was out of sight I hid; and
presently I came creeping back along the ditch and took a peep at them through the
hedge. They were all as nervous and flustered as could be, running all ways at once,
and falling over each other, and every one giving orders to everybody else and not
listening; and the Sergeant kept sending off parties of stoats to distant parts of the
grounds, and then sending other fellows to fetch ‘em back again; and I heard them
saying to each other, “That’s just like the weasels; they’re to stop comfortably in the
banquetinghall, and have feasting and toasts and songs and all sorts of fun, while we
must stay on guard in the cold and the dark, and in the end be cut to pieces by
bloodthirsty Badgers!”’ ‘Oh, you silly ass, Mole!’ cried Toad, ‘You’ve been and spoilt
everything!’ ‘Mole,’ said the Badger, in his dry, quiet way, ‘I perceive you have more
sense in your little finger than some other animals have in the whole of their fat bodies.
You have managed excellently, and I begin to have great hopes of you.
Good Mole! Clever Mole!’ The Toad was simply wild with jealousy, more especially as
he couldn’t make out for the life of him what the Mole had done that was so
particularly clever; but, fortunately for him, before he could show temper or expose
himself to the Badger’s sarcasm, the bell rang for luncheon.
It was a simple but sustaining meal- bacon and broad beans, and a macaroni pudding;
and when they had quite done, the Badger settled himself into an armchair, and said,
‘Well, we’ve got our work cut out for us to-night, and it will probably be pretty late
before we’re quite through with it; so I’m just going to take forty winks, while I can.’
And he drew a handkerchief over his face and was soon snoring.
The anxious and laborious Rat at once resumed his preparations, and started running
between his four little heaps, muttering, ‘Here’s-a-belt-for-the-Rat, here’sa-belt-for-theMole, here’s-a-belt-for-the-Toad, here’s-a-belt-for-the-Badger!’ and so on, with every
fresh accoutrement he produced, to which there seemed really no end; so the Mole
drew his arm through Toad’s, led him out into the open air, shoved him into a wicker
chair, and made him tell him all his adventures from beginning to end, which Toad
was only too willing to do. The Mole was a good listener, and Toad, with no one to
check his statements or to criticise in an unfriendly spirit, rather let himself go. Indeed,
much that he related belonged more properly to the category of what-might-havehappened-had-I-only- thought-of-itin-time-instead-of-ten-minutes-afterwards. Those
are always the best and the raciest adventures; and why should they not be truly ours,
as much as the somewhat inadequate things that really come off?
WHEN it began to grow dark, the Rat, with an air of excitement and mystery,
summoned them back into the parlour, stood each of them up alongside of his little
heap, and proceeded to dress them up for the coming expedition. He was very earnest
and thorough-going about it, and the affair took quite a long time. First, there was a
belt to go round each animal, and then a sword to be stuck into each belt, and then a
cutlass on the other side to balance it. Then a pair of pistols, a policeman’s truncheon,
several sets of handcuffs, some bandages and sticking-plaster, and a flask and a
sandwich-case. The Badger laughed good-humouredly and said, ‘All right, Ratty! It
amuses you and it doesn’t hurt me. I’m going to do all I’ve got to do with this here
stick.’ But the Rat only said, ‘Please, Badger. You know I shouldn’t like you to blame
me afterwards and say I had forgotten anything!’ When all was quite ready, the Badger
took a dark lantern in one paw, grasped his great stick with the other, and said, ‘Now
then, follow me! Mole first, ‘cos I’m very pleased with him; Rat next; Toad last. And
look here, Toady! Don’t you chatter so much as usual, or you’ll be sent back, as sure as
fate!’
The Toad was so anxious not to be left out that he took up the inferior position assigned
to him without a murmur, and the animals set off. The Badger led them along by the
river for a little way, and then suddenly swung himself over the edge into a hole in the
river-bank, a little above the water. The Mole and the Rat followed silently, swinging
themselves successfully into the hole as they had seen the Badger do; but when it came
to Toad’s turn, of course he managed to slip and fall into the water with a loud splash
and a squeal of alarm. He was hauled out by his friends, rubbed down and wrung out
hastily, comforted, and set on his legs; but the Badger was seriously angry, and told
him that the very next time be made a fool of himself he would most certainly be left
behind.
So at last they were in the secret passage, and the cutting-out expedition had really
begun!
It was cold, and dark, and damp, and low, and narrow, and poor Toad began to shiver,
partly from dread of what might be before him, partly because he was wet through.
The lantern was far ahead, and he could not help lagging behind a little in the
darkness. Then he heard the Rat call out warningly, ‘Come on, Toad!’ and a terror
seized him of being left behind, alone in the darkness, and he ‘came on’ with such a
rush that he upset the Rat into the Mole and the Mole into the Badger, and for a
moment all was confusion. The Badger thought they were being attacked from behind,
and, as there was no room to use a stick or a cutlass, drew a pistol, and was on the
point of putting a bullet into Toad. When he found out what had really happened he
was very angry indeed, and said, ‘Now this time that tiresome Toad shall be left
behind!’ But Toad whimpered, and the other two promised that they would be
answerable for his good conduct, and at last the Badger was pacified, and the
procession moved on; only this time the Rat brought up the rear, with a firm grip on
the shoulder of Toad.
So they groped and shuffled along, with their ears pricked up and their paws on their
pistols, till at last the Badger said, ‘We ought by now to be pretty nearly under the
Hall.’ Then suddenly they heard, far away as it might be, and yet apparently nearly
over their heads, a confused murmur of sound, as if people were shouting and cheering
and stamping on the floor and hammering on tables. The Toad’s nervous terrors all
returned, but the Badger only remarked placidly, ‘They are going it, the Weasels!’ The
passage now began to slope upwards; they groped onward a little further, and then the
noise broke out again, quite distinct this time, and very close above them. ‘Ooo-ray-ooray-oo-ray-ooray!’ they heard, and the stamping of little feet on the floor, and the
clinking of glasses as little fists pounded on the table. ‘What a time they’re having!’ said
the Badger. ‘Come on!’ They hurried along the passage till it came to a full stop, and
they found themselves standing under the trapdoor that led up into the butler’s pantry.
Such a tremendous noise was going on in the banqueting-hall that there was little
danger of their being overheard. The Badger said, ‘Now, boys, all together!’
and the four of them put their shoulders to the trap-door and heaved it back. Hoisting
each other up, they found themselves standing in the pantry, with only a door between
them and the banqueting-hall, where their unconscious enemies were carousing.
The noise, as they emerged from the passage, was simply deafening. At last, as the
cheering and hammering slowly subsided, a voice could be made out saying, ‘Well, I
do not propose to detain you much longer’- (great applause)- ‘but before I resume my
seat’- (renewed cheering)- ‘I should like to say one word about our kind host, Mr. Toad.
We all know Toad!’- (great laughter)- ‘Good Toad, modest Toad, honest Toad!’ (shrieks
of merriment).
‘Only just let me get at him!’ muttered Toad, grinding his teeth.
‘Hold hard a minute!’ said the Badger, restraining him with difficulty. ‘Get ready, all of
you!’ ‘-Let me sing you a little song,’ went on the voice, ‘which I have composed on the
subject of Toad’- (prolonged applause).
Then the Chief Weasel- for it was he- began in a high, squeaky voice ‘Toad he went apleasuring Gaily down the street-’
The Badger drew himself up, took a firm grip of his stick with both paws, glanced
round at his comrades, and cried‘The hour is come! Follow me!’ And flung the door
open wide.
My!
What a squealing and a squeaking and a screeching filled the air!
Well might the terrified weasels dive under the tables and spring madly up at the
windows! Well might the ferrets rush wildly for the fireplace and get hopelessly
jammed in the chimney! Well might tables and chairs be upset, and glass and china be
sent crashing on the floor, in the panic of that terrible moment when the four Heroes
strode wrathfully into the room! The mighty Badger, his whiskers bristling, his great
cudgel whistling through the air; Mole, black and grim, brandishing his stick and
shouting his awful war-cry, ‘A Mole! A Mole!’ Rat, desperate and determined, his belt
bulging with weapons of every age and every variety; Toad, frenzied with excitement
and injured pride, swollen to twice his ordinary size, leaping into the air and emitting
Toad-whoops that chilled them to the marrow! ‘Toad he went a-pleasuring!’ he yelled.
‘I’ll pleasure ‘em!’ and he went straight for the Chief Weasel. They were but four in all,
but to the panic-stricken weasels the hall seemed full of monstrous animals, grey, black,
brown and yellow, whooping and flourishing enormous cudgels; and they broke and
fled with squeals of terror and dismay, this way and that, through the windows, up the
chimney, anywhere to get out of reach of those terrible sticks.
The affair was soon over. Up and down, the whole length of the hall, strode the four
Friends, whacking with their sticks at every head that showed itself; and in five
minutes the room was cleared. Through the broken windows the shrieks of terrified
weasels escaping across the lawn were borne faintly to their cars; on the floor lay
prostrate some dozen or so of the enemy, on whom the Mole was busily engaged in
fitting handcuffs. The Badger, resting from his labours, leant on his stick and wiped his
honest brow.
‘Mole,’ he said, ‘you’re the best of fellows! Just cut along outside and look after those
stoat-sentries of yours, and see what they’re doing. I’ve an idea that, thanks to you, we
shan’t have much trouble from them to-night!’ The Mole vanished promptly through a
window; and the Badger bade the other two set a table on its legs again, pick up knives
and forks and plates and glasses from the debris on the floor, and see if they could find
materials for a supper. ‘I want some grub, I do,’ he said, in that rather common way he
had of speaking. ‘Stir your stumps, Toad, and look lively! We’ve got your house back
for you, and you don’t offer us so much as a sandwich.’ Toad felt rather hurt that the
Badger didn’t say pleasant things to him, as he had to the Mole, and tell him what a
fine fellow he was, and how splendidly he had fought; for he was rather particularly
pleased with himself and the way he had gone for the Chief Weasel and sent him flying
across the table with one blow of his stick. But he bustled about, and so did the Rat, and
soon they found some guava jelly in a glass dish, and a cold chicken, a tongue that had
hardly been touched, some trifle, and quite a lot of lobster salad; and in the pantry they
came upon a basketful of French rolls and any quantity of cheese, butter, and celery.
They were just about to sit down when the Mole clambered in through the window,
chuckling, with an armful of rifles.
‘It’s all over,’ he reported. ‘From what I can make out, as soon as the stoats, who were
very nervous and jumpy already, heard the shrieks and the yells and the uproar inside
the hall, some of them threw down their rifles and fled. The others stood fast for a bit,
but when the weasels came rushing out upon them they thought they were betrayed;
and the stoats grappled with the weasels, and the weasels fought to get away, and they
wrestled and wriggled and punched each other, and rolled over and over, till most of
‘em rolled into the river! They’ve all disappeared by now, one way or another; and I’ve
got their rifles. So that’s all right!’ ‘Excellent and deserving animal!’ said the Badger, his
mouth full of chicken and trifle. ‘Now, there’s just one more thing I want you to do,
Mole, before you sit down to your supper along of us; and I wouldn’t trouble you only
I know I can trust you to see a thing done, and I wish I could say the same of every one
I know. I’d send Rat, if he wasn’t a poet. I want you to take those fellows on the floor
there upstairs with you, and have some bedrooms cleaned out and tidied up and made
really comfortable. See that they sweep under the beds, and put clean sheets and
pillow-cases on, and turn down one corner of the bed-clothes, just as you know it ought
to be done; and have a can of hot water, and clean towels, and fresh cakes of soap, put
in each room. And then you can give them a licking apiece, if it’s any satisfaction to
you, and put them out by the back-door, and we shan’t see any more of them, I fancy.
And then come along and have some of this cold tongue. It’s first rate. I’m very pleased
with you, Mole!’ The goodnatured Mole picked up a stick, formed his prisoners up in a
line on the floor, gave them the order ‘Quick march!’ and led his squad off to the upper
floor. After a time, he appeared again, smiling, and said that every room was ready,
and as clean as a new pin. ‘And I didn’t have to lick them, either,’ he added. ‘I thought,
on the whole, they had had licking enough for one night, and the weasels, when I put
the point to them, quite agreed with me, and said they wouldn’t think of troubling me.
They were very penitent, and said they were extremely sorry for what they had done,
but it was all the fault of the Chief Weasel and the stoats, and if ever they could do
anything for us at any time to make up, we had only got to mention it. So I gave them a
roll a-piece, and let them out at the back, and off they ran, as hard as they could!’ Then
the Mole pulled his chair up to the table, and pitched into the cold tongue; and Toad,
like the gentleman he was, put all his jealousy from him, and said heartily, ‘Thank you
kindly, dear Mole, for all your pains and trouble tonight, and especially for your
cleverness this morning!’ The Badger was pleased at that, and said, ‘There spoke my
brave Toad!’ So they finished their supper in great joy and contentment, and presently
retired to rest between clean sheets, safe in Toad’s ancestral home, won back by
matchless valour, consummate strategy, and a proper handling of sticks.
The following morning, Toad, who had overslept himself as usual, came down to
breakfast disgracefully late, and found on the table a certain quantity of egg-shells,
some fragments of cold and leathery toast, a coffee-pot three-fourths empty, and really
very little else; which did not tend to improve his temper, considering that, after all, it
was his own house. Through the French windows of the breakfast-room he could see
the Mole and the Water Rat sitting in wicker-chairs out on the lawn, evidently telling
each other stories; roaring with laughter and kicking their short legs up in the air. The
Badger, who was in an arm-chair and deep in the morning paper, merely looked up
and nodded when Toad entered the room. But Toad knew his man, so he sat down and
made the best breakfast he could, merely observing to himself that he would get square
with the others sooner or later. When he had nearly finished, the Badger looked up and
remarked rather shortly: ‘I’m sorry, Toad, but I’m afraid there’s a heavy morning’s
work in front of you. You see, we really ought to have a Banquet at once, to celebrate
this affair. It’s expected of you- in fact, it’s the rule.’ ‘O, all right!’ said the Toad, readily.
‘Anything to oblige. Though why on earth you should want to have a Banquet in the
morning I cannot understand. But you know I do not live to please myself, but merely
to find out what my friends want, and then try and arrange it for ‘em, you dear old
Badger!’
‘Don’t pretend to be stupider than you really are,’ replied the Badger, crossly; ‘and
don’t chuckle and splutter in your coffee while you’re talking; it’s not manners. What I
mean is, the Banquet will be at night, of course, but the invitations will have to be
written and got off at once, and you’ve got to write ‘em. Now, sit down at that tablethere’s stacks of letter-paper on it, with “Toad Hall” at the top in blue and gold- and
write invitations to all our friends, and if you stick to it we shall get them out before
luncheon. And I’ll bear a hand, too; and take my share of the burden. I’ll order the
Banquet.’ ‘What!’ cried Toad, dismayed. ‘Me stop indoors and write a lot of rotten
letters on a jolly morning like this, when I want to go around my property, and set
everything and everybody to rights, and swagger about and enjoy myself! Certainly
not! I’ll be- I’ll see you- Stop a minute, though! Why, of course, dear Badger! What is
my pleasure or convenience compared with that of others! You wish it done, and it
shall be done. Go, Badger, order the Banquet, order what you like; then join our young
friends outside in their innocent mirth, oblivious of me and my cares and toils. I
sacrifice this fair morning on the altar of duty and friendship!’ The Badger looked at
him very suspiciously, but Toad’s frank, open countenance made it difficult to suggest
any unworthy motive in this change of attitude.
He quitted the room, accordingly, in the direction of the kitchen, and as soon as the
door had closed behind him, Toad hurried to the writing-table. A fine idea had
occurred to him while he was talking.
The idea pleased him mightily, and he worked very hard and got all the letters finished
by noon, at which hour it was reported to him that there was a small and rather
bedraggled weasel at the door, inquiring timidly whether he could be of any service to
the gentlemen. Toad swaggered out and found it was one of the prisoners of the
previous evening, very respectful and anxious to please. He patted him on the head,
shoved the bundle of invitations into his paw, and told him to cut along quick and
deliver them as fast as he could, and if he liked to come back again in the evening,
perhaps there might be a shilling for him, or, again, perhaps there mightn’t; and the
poor weasel seemed really quite grateful, and hurried off eagerly to do his mission.
When the other animals came back to luncheon, very boisterous and breezy after a
morning on the river, the Mole, whose conscience had been pricking him, looked
doubtfully at Toad, expecting to find him sulky or depressed. Instead, he was so
uppish and inflated that the Mole began to suspect something; while the Rat and the
Badger exchanged significant glances.
As soon as the meal was over, Toad thrust his paws deep into his trouser-pockets,
remarked casually, ‘Well, look after yourselves, you fellows! Ask for anything you
want!’ and was swaggering off in the direction of the garden, where he wanted to think
out an idea or two for his coming speeches, when the Rat caught him by the arm.
Toad rather suspected what he was after, and did his best to get away; but when the
Badger took him firmly by the other arm he began to see that the game was up. The
two animals conducted him between them into the small smokingroom that opened out
of the entrance-hall, shut the door, and put him into a chair.
Then they both stood in front of him, while Toad sat silent and regarded them with
much suspicion and ill-humour.
‘Now, look here, Toad,’ said the Rat. ‘It’s about this Banquet, and very sorry I am to
have to speak to you like this. But we want you to understand clearly, once and for all,
that there are going to be no speeches and no songs. Try and grasp the fact that on this
occasion we’re not arguing with you; we’re just telling you.’ Toad saw that he was
trapped. They understood him, they saw through him, they had got ahead of him. His
pleasant dream was shattered.
‘Mayn’t I sing them just one little song?’ he pleaded piteously.
‘No, not one little song,’ replied the Rat firmly, though his heart bled as he noticed the
trembling lip of the poor disappointed Toad. ‘It’s no good, Toady; you know well that
your songs are all conceit and boasting and vanity; and your speeches are all self-praise
and- and- well, and gross exaggeration and- and-’ ‘And gas,’ put in the Badger, in his
common way.
‘It’s for your own good, Toady,’ went on the Rat. ‘You know you must turn over a new
leaf sooner or later, and now seems a splendid time to begin; a sort of turning-point in
your career. Please don’t think that saying all this doesn’t hurt me more than it hurts
you.’
Toad remained a long while plunged in thought. At last he raised his head, and the
traces of strong emotion were visible on his features. ‘You have conquered, my friends,’
he said in broken accents. ‘It was, to be sure, but a small thing that I asked- merely
leave to blossom and expand for yet one more evening, to let myself go and hear the
tumultuous applause that always seems to me- somehow- to bring out my best
qualities. However, you are right, I know, and I am wrong. Henceforth I will be a very
different Toad. My friends, you shall never have occasion to blush for me again. But, O
dear, O dear, this is a hard world!’ And, pressing his handkerchief to his face, he left
the room, with faltering footsteps.
‘Badger,’ said the Rat, ‘I feel like a brute; I wonder what you feel like?’ ‘O, I know, I
know,’ said the Badger gloomily. ‘But the thing had to be done.
This good fellow has got to live here, and hold his own, and be respected. Would you
have him a common laughing-stock, mocked and jeered at by stoats and weasels? ‘Of
course not,’ said the Rat. ‘And, talking of weasels, it’s lucky we came upon that little
weasel, just as he was setting out with Toad’s invitations. I suspected something from
what you told me, and had a look at one or two; they were simply disgraceful. I
confiscated the lot, and the good Mole is now sitting in the blue boudoir, filling up
plain, simple invitation cards.’
At last the hour for the banquet began to draw near, and Toad, who on leaving the
others had retired to his bedroom, was still sitting there, melancholy and thoughtful.
His brow resting on his paw, he pondered long and deeply. Gradually his countenance
cleared, and he began to smile long, slow smiles. Then he took to giggling in a shy, selfconscious manner. At last he got up, locked the door, drew the curtains across the
windows, collected all the chairs in the room and arranged them in a semicircle, and
took up his position in front of them, swelling visibly.
Then he bowed, coughed twice, and, letting himself go, with uplifted voice he sang, to
the enraptured audience that his imagination so clearly saw, TOAD’S LAST LITTLE SONG!
The Toad- came- home! There was panic in the parlours and howling in the halls, There
was crying in the cow-sheds and shrieking in the stalls, When the Toad- came- home!
When the Toad- came- home! There was smashing in of window and crashing in of
door, There was chivvying of weasels that fainted on the floor, When the Toad- camehome! Bang! go the drums! The trumpeters are tooting and the soldiers are saluting,
And the cannon they are shooting and the motor-cars are hooting, As the- Hero- comes!
Shout- Hoo-ray! And let each one of the crowd try and shout it very loud, In honour of
an animal of whom you’re justly proud, For it’s Toad’s- great- day!
He sang this very loud, with great unction and expression; and when he had done, he
sang it all over again.
Then he heaved a deep sigh; a long, long, long sigh.
Then he dipped his hairbrush in the water-jug, parted his hair in the middle, and
plastered it down very straight and sleek on each side of his face; and, unlocking the
door, went quietly down the stairs to greet his guests, who he knew must be
assembling in the drawing-room.
All the animals cheered when he entered, and crowded round to congratulate him and
say nice things about his courage, and his cleverness, and his fighting qualities; but
Toad only smiled faintly, and murmured, ‘Not at all!’ Or, sometimes, for a change, ‘On
the contrary!’ Otter, who was standing on the hearthrug, describing to an admiring
circle of friends exactly how he would have managed things had be been there, came
forward with a shout, threw his arm round Toad’s neck, and tried to take him round
the room in triumphal progress; but Toad, in a mild way, was rather snubby to him,
remarking gently, as he disengaged himself, ‘Badger’s was the mastermind; the Mole
and the Water Rat bore the brunt of the fighting; I merely served in the ranks and did
little or nothing.’ The animals were evidently puzzled and taken aback by this
unexpected attitude of his; and Toad felt, as he moved from one guest to the other,
making his modest responses, that he was an object of absorbing interest to every one.
The Badger had ordered everything of the best, and the banquet was a great success.
There was much talking and laughter and chaff among the animals, but through it all
Toad, who of course was in the chair, looked down his nose and murmured pleasant
nothings to the animals on either side of him. At intervals he stole a glance at the
Badger and the Rat, and always when he looked they were staring at each other with
their mouths open; and this gave him the greatest satisfaction. Some of the younger and
livelier animals, as the evening wore on, got whispering to each other that things were
not so amusing as they used to be in the good old days; and there were some knockings
on the table and cries of ‘Toad!
Speech! Speech from Toad! Song! Mr. Toad’s song!’ But Toad only shook his head
gently, raised one paw in mild protest, and, by pressing delicacies on his guests, by
topical small-talk, and by earnest inquiries after members of their families not yet old
enough to appear at social functions, managed to convey to them that this dinner was
being run on strictly conventional lines.
He was indeed an altered Toad! After this climax, the four animals continued to lead
their lives, so rudely broken in upon by civil war, in great joy and contentment,
undisturbed by further risings or invasions. Toad, after due consultation with his
friends, selected a handsome gold chain and locket set with pearls, which he
dispatched to the gaoler’s daughter with a letter that even the Badger admitted to be
modest, grateful, and appreciative; and the engine-driver, in his turn, was properly
thanked and compensated for all his pains and trouble. Under severe compulsion from
the Badger, even the barge-woman was, with some trouble, sought out and the value of
her horse discreetly made good to her; though Toad kicked terribly at this, holding
himself to be an instrument of Fate, sent to punish fat women with mottled arms who
couldn’t tell a real gentleman when they saw one. The amount involved, it was true,
was not very burdensome, the gipsy’s valuation being admitted by local assessors to be
approximately correct.
Sometimes, in the course of long summer evenings, the friends would take a stroll
together in the Wild Wood, now successfully tamed so far as they were concerned; and
it was pleasing to see how respectfully they were greeted by the in habitants, and how
the mother-weasels would bring their young ones to the mouths of their holes, and say,
pointing, ‘Look, baby! There goes the great Mr. Toad! And that’s the gallant Water Rat,
a terrible fighter, walking along o’ him! And yonder comes the famous Mr. Mole, of
whom you so often have heard your father tell!’ But when their infants were fractious
and quite beyond control, they would quiet them by telling how, if they didn’t hush
them and not fret them, the terrible grey Badger would up and get them. This was a
base libel on Badger, who, though he cared little about Society, was rather fond of
children; but it never failed to have its full effect.
These were the ones that really hurt. Can you see your name in that lot, Laura? I reckon you'd
sneak into the top ten, but there's no place for you in the top five; those places are reserved for
the kind of humiliations and heartbreaks that you're just not capable of delivering. That probably
sounds crueler than it is meant to, but the fact is that we're too old to make each other miserable,
and that's a good thing, not a bad thing, so don't take your failure to make the list personally.
Those days are gone, and good fucking riddance to them; unhappiness really meant something
back then. Now it's just a drag, like a cold or having no money. If you really wanted to mess me
up, you should have got to me earlier.
Most nights we used to mess around in the park around the corner from my house. I lived in
Hertfordshire, but I might just as well have lived in any suburb in England: it was that sort of
suburb, and that sort of park — three minutes away from home, right across the road from a little
row of shops (a VG supermarket, a newsagent, an off-license). There was nothing around that
could help you get your geographical bearings; if the shops were open (and they closed at fivethirty, and one o'clock on Thursdays, and all day Sunday), you could go into the newsagent's and
look for a local newspaper, but even that might not give you much of a clue.
 We were twelve or thirteen, and had recently discovered irony — or at least, what I later
understood to be irony: we only allowed ourselves to play on the swings and the roundabout and
the other kids' stuff rusting away in there if we could do it with a sort of self-conscious ironic
detachment. This involved either an imitation of absentmindedness (whistling, or chatting, or
fiddling with a cigarette stub or a box of matches usually did the trick) or a flirtation with danger,
so we jumped off the swings when they could go no higher, jumped on to the roundabout when it
would go no faster, hung on to the end of the swingboat until it reached an almost vertical
position. If you could somehow prove that these childish entertainments had the potential to dash
your brains out, then playing on them became OK somehow.
 We had no irony when it came to girls, though. There was just no time to develop it. One
moment they weren't there, not in any form that interested us, anyway, and the next you couldn't
miss them; they were everywhere, all over the place. One moment you wanted to clonk them on
the head for being your sister, or someone else's sister, and the next you wanted to actually,
we didn't know what we wanted next, but it was something, something. Almost overnight, all
these sisters (there was no other kind of girl, not yet) had become interesting, disturbing, even.
 See, what did we have that was any different from what we'd had before? Squeaky voices, but
a squeaky voice doesn't do much for you, really — it makes you preposterous, not desirable. And
the sprouting pubic hairs were our secret, strictly between us and our Y-fronts, and it would be
years before a member of the opposite sex could verify that they were where they should be.
Girls, on the other hand, quite clearly had breasts, and, to accompany them, a new way of
walking: arms folded over the chest, a posture which simultaneously disguised and drew
attention to what had just happened. And then there was makeup and perfume, invariably cheap,
and inexpertly, sometimes even comically, applied, but still a quite terrifying sign that things had
progressed without us, beyond us, behind our backs.
 I started going out with one of them no, that's not right, because I had absolutely no input
into the decision-making process. And I can't say that she started going out with me, either: it's
that phrase 'going out with' that's the problem, because it suggests some sort of parity and
equality. What happened was that David Ashworth's sister Alison peeled off from the female
pack that gathered every night by the bench and adopted me, tucked me under her arm, and led
me away from the swingboat.
 I can't remember now how she did this. I don't think I was even aware of it at the time,
because halfway through our first kiss, my first kiss, I can recall feeling utterly bewildered,
totally unable to explain how Alison Ashworth and I had become so intimate. I wasn't even sure
how I'd ended up on her side of the park, away from her brother and Mark Godfrey and the rest,
nor how we had separated from her crowd, nor why she tipped her face toward me so that I knew
I was supposed to put my mouth on hers. The whole episode defies any rational explanation. But
all these things happened, and they happened again, most of them, the following evening, and the
evening after that.
 What did I think I was doing? What did she think she was doing? When I want to kiss people
in that way now, with mouths and tongues and all that, it's because I want other things too: sex,
Friday nights at the cinema, company and conversation, fused networks of family and friends,
Lemsips brought to me in bed when I am ill, a new pair of ears for my records and CDs, maybe a
little boy called Jack and a little girl called Holly or Maisie, I haven't decided yet. But I didn't
want any of those things from Alison Ashworth. Not children, because we were children, and not
Friday nights at the pictures, because we went Saturday mornings, and not Lemsips, because my
mum did that, not even sex, especially not sex, please God not sex, the filthiest and most
terrifying invention of the early seventies.
 So what was the significance of the snog? The truth is that there was no significance; we were
just lost in the dark. One part imitation (people I had seen kissing by 1972: James Bond, Simon
Templar, Napoleon Solo, Barbara Windsor and Sid James or maybe Jim Dale, Elsie Tanner,
Omar Sharif and Julie Christie, Elvis, and lots of black-and-white people my mum wanted to
watch, although they never waggled their heads from side to side) to one part hormonal slavery
to one part peer group pressure (Kevin Bannister and Elizabeth Barnes had been at it for a couple
of weeks) to one part blind panic there was no consciousness, no desire and no pleasure,
beyond an unfamiliar and moderately pleasant warmth in the gut. We were little animals, which
is not to imply that by the end of the week we were tearing our tank tops off; just that,
metaphorically speaking, we had begun to sniff each other's bottoms, and we did not find the
odor entirely repellent.
 But listen, Laura. On the fourth night of our relationship I turned up in the park and Alison
was sitting on the bench with her arm around Kevin Bannister, with Elizabeth Barnes nowhere in
sight. Nobody — not Alison, or Kevin, or me, or the sexually uninitiated retards hanging off the
end of the swingboat said anything at all. I stung, and I blushed, and I suddenly forgot how to
walk without being aware of every single part of my body. What to do? Where to go? I didn't
want to fight; I didn't want to sit there with the two of them; I didn't want to go home. So,
concentrating very hard on the empty No. 6 packets that marked out the path between the girls
and the boys, and not looking up or behind me or to either side, I headed back toward the massed
ranks of the single males hanging off the swing-boat. Halfway home, I made my only error of
judgment: I stopped and looked at my watch, although for the life of me I don't know what I was
attempting to convey, or whom I was trying to kid. What sort of time, after all, could make a
thirteen-year-old boy spin away from a girl and toward a playground, palms sweating, heart
racing, trying desperately not to cry? Certainly not four o'clock on a late September afternoon.
 I scrounged a fag off Mark Godfrey and went and sat on my own on the roundabout.
 'Scrubber,' spat Alison's brother David, and I smiled gratefully at him.
 And that was that. Where had I gone wrong? First night: park, fag, snog. Second night: ditto.
Third night: ditto. Fourth night: chucked. OK, OK. Maybe I should have seen the signs. Maybe I
was asking for it. Round about that second ditto I should have spotted that we were in a rut, that I
had allowed things to fester to the extent that she was on the lookout for someone else. But she
could have tried to tell me! She could at least have given me another couple of days to put things
right!
 My relationship with Alison Ashworth had lasted six hours (the two-hour gap between school
and Nationwide. times three), so I could hardly claim that I'd got used to having her around, that
I didn't know what to do with myself. In fact, I can hardly recall anything about her at all, now.
 Long black hair? Maybe. Small? Smaller than me, certainly. Slanted, almost oriental eyes and
a dark complexion? That could have been her, or it could have been someone else. Whatever.
But if we were doing this list in grief order, rather than chronological order, I'd put it right up
there at number two. It would be nice to think that as I've got older times have changed,
relationships have become more sophisticated, females less cruel, skins thicker, reactions
sharper, instincts more developed. But there still seems to be an element of that evening in
everything that has happened to me since; all my other romantic stories seem to be a scrambled
version of that first one. Of course, I have never had to take that long walk again, and my ears
have not burned with quite the same fury, and I have never had to count the No. 6 packets in
order to avoid mocking eyes and floods of tears not really, not actually, not as such. It just
feels that way, sometimes.
Penny Hardwick was a nice girl, and, nowadays, I'm all for nice girls, although then I wasn't so
sure. She had a nice mum and dad, and a nice house, detached, with a garden and a tree and a
fishpond, and a nice girl's haircut (she was blond, and she kept her hair a sort of sporty, clean,
wholesome, form-captain mid-length), and nice, smiling eyes, and a nice younger sister, who
smiled politely when I rang the doorbell and kept out of the way when we wanted her to. She had
nice manners — my mum loved her — and she always got nice school reports. Penny was nicelooking, and her top five recording artists were Carly Simon, Carole King, James Taylor, Cat
Stevens, and Elton John. Lots of people liked her. She was so nice, in fact, that she wouldn't let
me put my hand underneath or even on top of her bra, and so I was finished with her, although
obviously I didn't tell her why. She cried, and I hated her for it, because she made me feel bad.
 I can imagine what sort of person Penny Hardwick became: a nice person. I know that she
went to college, did well, and landed a job as a radio producer for the BBC. I would guess that
she is bright, and serious-minded, maybe too much so, sometimes, and ambitious, but not in a
way that makes you want to vomit; she was a version of all these things when we went out, and
at another stage in my life I would have found all these virtues attractive. Then, however, I
wasn't interested in qualities, just breasts, and she was therefore no good to me.
 I would like to be able to tell you that we had long, interesting conversations, and that we
remained firm friends throughout our teenage years — she would have made someone a lovely
friend — but I don't think we ever talked. We went to the pictures, to parties and to discos, and
we wrestled. We wrestled in her bedroom, and my bedroom, and her living room, and my living
room, and in bedrooms at parties, and in living rooms at parties, and in the summer we wrestled
on various plots of grass. We were wrestling over the same old issue. Sometimes I got so bored
of trying to touch her breasts that I would try to touch her between her legs, a gesture that had a
sort of self-parodying wit about it: it was like trying to borrow a fiver, getting turned down, and
asking to borrow fifty quid instead.
 These were the questions boys asked other boys at my school (a school that contained only
boys): 'Are you getting any?'; 'Does she let you have any?'; 'How much does she let you have?';
and so on. Sometimes the questions were derisory, and expected the answer 'No': 'You're not
getting anything, are you?'; 'You haven't even had a bit of tit, have you?' Girls, meanwhile, had
to be content with the passive voice. Penny used the expression 'broken into': 'I don't want to be
broken into yet,' she would explain patiently and maybe a little sadly (she seemed to understand
that one day — but not now — she would have to give in, and when it happened she wouldn't
like it) when she removed my hand from her chest for the one hundred thousandth time. Attack
and defense, invasion and repulsion . . . it was as if breasts were little pieces of property that had
been unlawfully annexed by the opposite sex — they were rightfully ours and we wanted them
back.
 Luckily, however, there were traitors, fifth columnists, in the opposing camp. Some boys
knew of other boys whose girlfriends would 'let' them do anything; sometimes these girls were
supposed to have actively assisted in their own molestation. Nobody had ever heard of a girl who
had gone as far as undressing, or even removing or loosening undergarments, of course. That
would have been taking collaboration too far. As I understood it, these girls had simply
positioned themselves in a way that encouraged access. 'She tucks her stomach in and
everything,' Clive Stevens remarked approvingly of his brother's girlfriend; it took me nearly a
year to work out the import of this maneuver. No wonder I still remember the stomach-tucker's
first name (Judith); there's a part of me that still wants to meet her.
Read any women's magazine and you'll see the same complaint over and over again: men —
those little boys ten or twenty or thirty years on — are hopeless in bed. They are not interested in
'foreplay'; they have no desire to stimulate the erogenous zones of the opposite sex; they are
selfish, greedy, clumsy, unsophisticated. These complaints, you can't help feeling, are kind of
ironic. Back then, all we wanted was foreplay, and girls weren't interested. They didn't want to
be touched, caressed, stimulated, aroused; in fact, they used to thump us if we tried. It's not really
very surprising, then, that we're not much good at all that. We spent two or three long and
extremely formative years being told very forcibly not even to think about it. Between the ages
of fourteen and twenty-four, foreplay changes from being something that boys want to do and
girls don't, to something that women want and men can't be bothered with. (Or so they say. Me, I
like foreplay — mostly because the times when all I wanted to do was touch are alarmingly fresh
in my mind.) The perfect match, if you ask me, is between the Cosmo woman and the fourteenyear-old boy.
 If somebody had asked me why I was so hell-bent on grabbing a piece of Penny Hardwick's
chest, I wouldn't have known what to say. And if somebody were to ask Penny why she was so
hell-bent on stopping me, I'll bet she'd be stumped for an answer too. What was in it for me? I
wasn't asking for any sort of reciprocation, after all. Why didn't she want her erogenous zones
stimulated? I have no idea. All I know is that you could, if you wanted to, find the answers to all
sorts of difficult questions buried in that terrible war-torn interregnum between the first pubic
hair and the first soiled Durex.
 And in any case, maybe I didn't want to put my hand under Penny's bra as much as I thought.
Maybe other people wanted me to touch her more than I did. After a couple of months of
fighting on sofas all over town with Penny, I'd had enough: I had admitted, unwisely in
retrospect, to a friend that I wasn't getting anywhere, and my friend had told some other friends,
and I was the butt of a number of cruel and unpleasant jokes. I gave Penny one last try, in my
bedroom while my mum and dad were at the town hall watching a local dramatic society
interpretation of Toad of Toad Hall: I used a degree of force that would have outraged and
terrified an adult female, but got nowhere, and when I walked her home we hardly spoke.
 I was offhand with her the next time we went out, and when she went to kiss me at the end of
the evening, I shrugged her off. 'What's the point?' I asked her. 'It never goes anywhere.' The
time after that she asked whether I still wanted to see her, and I looked the other way. We had
been going out for three months, which was as near to a permanent relationship as you could get
in the fourth year. (Her mum and dad had even met my mum and dad. They liked each other.)
She cried, then, and I loathed her for making me feel guilty, and for making me finish with her.
 I went out with a girl called Kim, who I knew for a fact had already been invaded, and who (I
was correct in assuming) wouldn't object to being invaded again. Penny went out with Chris
Thomson from my class, a boy who had had more girlfriends than all the rest of us put together. I
was out of my depth, and so was she. One morning, maybe three weeks after my last grapple
with Penny, Thomson came roaring into our form room. 'Oi, Fleming, you spastic. Guess who I
knobbed last night?'
 I felt the room spin round.
 'You never got so much as a bit of tit in three months, and I shagged her the first week!'
 I believed him; everyone knew that he got whatever he wanted from whomever he saw. I had
been humiliated, beaten, outperformed; I felt stupid, and small, and much, much younger than
this unpleasant, oversized, big-mouthed moron. It shouldn't have mattered so much. Thomson
was in a league of his own when it came to matters of the lower body, and there were plenty of
little jerky creeps in 4b who had never so much as put their arm around a girl. Even my side of
the debate, inaudible though it was, must have appeared impossibly sophisticated to them. I
wasn't losing that much face. But I still couldn't understand what had happened. How had this
transformation in Penny been effected? How had Penny gone from being a girl who wouldn't do
anything to a girl who would do everything there was to do? Maybe it was best not to think about
it too hard; I didn't want to feel sorry for anybody else except me.
 I expect Penny turned out all right, and I know I turned out all right, and I would suspect that
even Chris Thomson isn't the world's worst person. At least, it's hard to imagine him skidding
into his place of work, his bank or his insurance office or car showroom, chucking his briefcase
down and informing a colleague with raucous glee that he has 'knobbed' said colleague's wife. (It
is easy enough to imagine him knobbing the wife, however. He looked like a wife-knobber, even
then.) Women who disapprove of men — and there's plenty to disapprove of — should
remember how we started out, and how far we have had to travel.
A FEW MILES south of Soledad, the Salinas River drops in close
to the hillside bank and runs deep and green. The water is warm
too, for it has slipped twinkling over the yellow sands in the
sunlight before reaching the narrow pool. On one side of the river
the golden foothill slopes curve up to the strong and rocky Gabilan
mountains, but on the valley side the water is lined with trees -
willows fresh and green with every spring, carrying in their lower
leaf junctures the debris of the winter’s flooding; and sycamores
with mottled, white, recumbent limbs and branches that arch over
the pool. On the sandy bank under the trees the leaves lie deep
and so crisp that a lizard makes a great skittering if he runs
among them. Rabbits come out of the brush to sit on the sand in
the evening, and the damp flats are covered with the night tracks
of ’coons, and with the spread pads of dogs from the ranches, and
with the split-wedge tracks of deer that come to drink in the dark.
 There is a path through the willows and among the sycamores, a
path beaten hard by boys coming down from the ranches to swim
in the deep pool, and beaten hard by tramps who come wearily
down from the highway in the evening to jungle-up near water. In
front of the low horizontal limb of a giant sycamore there is an ash
pile made by many fires; the limb is worn smooth by men who
have sat on it.

 Evening of a hot day started the little wind to moving among the
leaves. The shade climbed up the hills toward the top. On the sand
banks the rabbits sat as quietly as little gray, sculptured stones.
And then from the direction of the state highway came the sound
of footsteps on crisp sycamore leaves. The rabbits hurried
noiselessly for cover. A stilted heron labored up into the air and
pounded down river. For a moment the place was lifeless, and
then two men emerged from the path and came into the opening
by the green pool.
 They had walked in single file down the path, and even in the
open one stayed behind the other. Both were dressed in denim
trousers and in denim coats with brass buttons. Both wore black,
shapeless hats and both carried tight blanket rolls slung over
their shoulders. The first man was small and quick, dark of face,
with restless eyes and sharp, strong features. Every part of him
was defined: small, strong hands, slender arms, a thin and bony
nose. Behind him walked his opposite, a huge man, shapeless of
face, with large, pale eyes, with wide, sloping shoulders; and he
walked heavily, dragging his feet a little, the way a bear drags his
paws. His arms did not swing at his sides, but hung loosely.
 The first man stopped short in the clearing, and the follower
nearly ran over him. He took off his hat and wiped the sweat-band
with his forefinger and snapped the moisture off. His huge
companion dropped his blankets and flung himself down and
drank from the surface of the green pool; drank with long gulps,
snorting into the water like a horse. The small man stepped
nervously beside him.
 "Lennie!" he said sharply. "Lennie, for God’ sakes don’t drink so
much." Lennie continued to snort into the pool. The small man
leaned over and shook him by the shoulder. "Lennie. You gonna be
sick like you was last night."
 Lennie dipped his whole head under, hat and all, and then he sat
up on the bank and his hat dripped down on his blue coat and ran
down his back. "Tha’s good," he said. "You drink some, George.
You take a good big drink." He smiled happily.
 George unslung his bindle and dropped it gently on the bank. "I
ain’t sure it’s good water," he said. "Looks kinda scummy."
 Lennie dabb1ed his big paw in the water and wiggled his fingers
so the water arose in little splashes; rings widened across the pool
to the other side and came back again. Lennie watched them go.
"Look, George. Look what I done."
 George knelt beside the pool and drank from his hand with quick
scoops. "Tastes all right," he admitted. "Don’t really seem to be
running, though. You never oughta drink water when it ain’t
running, Lennie," he said hopelessly. "You’d drink out of a gutter
if you was thirsty." He threw a scoop of water into his face and
rubbed it about with his hand, under his chin and around the back
of his neck. Then he replaced his hat, pushed himself back from
the river, drew up his knees and embraced them. Lennie, who had
been watching, imitated George exactly. He pushed himself back,
drew up his knees, embraced them, looked over to George to see
whether he had it just right. He pulled his hat down a little more
over his eyes, the way George’s hat was.
 George stared morosely at the water. The rims of his eyes were
red with sun glare. He said angrily, "We could just as well of rode
clear to the ranch if that bastard bus driver knew what he was
talkin’ about. ‘Jes’ a little stretch down the highway,’ he says. ‘Jes’
a little stretch.’ God damn near four miles, that’s what it was!
Didn’t wanta stop at the ranch gate, that’s what. Too God damn
lazy to pull up. Wonder he isn’t too damn good to stop in Soledad
at all. Kicks us out and says, ‘Jes’ a little stretch down the road.’ I
bet it wasmore than four miles. Damn hot day."
 Lennie looked timidly over to him. "George?"
 "Yeah, what ya want?"
 "Where we goin’, George?"
 The little man jerked down the brim of his hat and scowled over
at Lennie. "So yon forgot that awready, did you? I gotta tell you
again, do I? Jesus Christ, you’re a crazy bastard!"
 "I forgot," Lennie said softly. "I tried not to forget. Honest to God I
did, George."
 "O.K.- O.K. I’ll tell ya again. I ain’t got nothing to do. Might jus’
as well spen’ all my time tellin’ you things and then you forget
’em, and I tell you again."
 "Tried and tried," said Lennie, "but it didn’t do no good. I
remember about the rabbits, George."
 "The hell with the rabbits. That’s all you ever can remember is
them rabbits. O.K.! Now you listen and this time you got to
remember so we don’t get in no trouble. You remember settin’ in
that gutter on Howard Street and watchin’ that blackboard?"
 Lennie’s face broke into a delighted smile. "Why sure, George. I
remember that.... but.... what’d we do then? I remember some girls
come by and you says.... you say."
 "The hell with what I says. You remember about us goin’ into
Murray and Ready’s, and they give us work cards and bus
tickets?"
 "Oh, sure, George. I remember that now." His hands went quickly
into his side coat pockets. He said gently, "George.... I ain’t got
mine. I musta lost it," He looked down at the ground in despair.
 "You never had none, you crazy bastard. I got both of ’em here.
Think I’d let you carry your own work card?"
 Lennie grinned with relief. "I.... I thought I put it in my side
pocket." His hand went into the pocket again.
 George looked sharply at him. "What’d you take outa that
pocket?"
 "Ain’t a thing in my pocket," Lennie said cleverly.
 "I know there ain’t. You got it in your hand. What you got in your
hand - hidin’ it?"
 "I ain’t got nothin’, George, Honest."
 "Come on, give it here."
 Lennie held his closed hand away from George's direction. "It’s
only a mouse, George."
 "A mouse? A live mouse?"
 "Uh-uh. Jus’ a dead mouse, George. I didn’ kill it. ’ Honest! I
found it. I found it dead."
 "Give it here!" said George.
 "Aw, leave me have it, George."
 "Give ithere!"
 Lennie’s closed hand slowly obeyed. George took the mouse and
threw it across the pool to the other side, among the brush. "What
you want of a dead mouse, anyways?"
 "I could pet it with my thumb while we walked along," said
Lennie.
 "Well, you ain’t petting no mice while you walk with me. You
remember where we’re goin’ now?"
 Lennie looked startled and then in embarrassment hid his face
against his knees. "I forgot again."
 "Jesus Christ," George said resignedly. "Well - look, we’re gonna
work on a ranch like the one we come from up north"
 "Up north?"
 "In Weed."
 "Oh, sure. I remember. In Weed."
 "That ranch we’re goin’ to is right down there about a quarter
mile. We’re gonna go in an’ see the boss. Now, look - I’ll give him
the work tickets, but you ain’t gonna say a word. You jus’ stand
there and don’t say nothing. If he finds out what a crazy bastard
you are, we won’t get no job, but if he sees ya work before he hears
ya talk, we’re set. Ya got that?"
 "Sure, George. Sure I got it."
 "O.K. Now when we go in to see the boss, what you gonna do?"
 "I.... I," Lennie thought. His face grew tight with thought. "I....
ain’t gonna say nothin’. Jus’ gonna stan’ there."
 "Good boy. That’s swell. You say that over two, three times so you
sure won’t forget it."
 Lennie droned to himself softly, "I ain’t gonna say nothin’.... I
ain’t gonna say nothin’.... I ain’t gonna say nothin’."
 "O.K.," said George. "An’ you ain’t gonna do no bad things like you
done in Weed, neither."
 Lennie looked puzzled. "Like I done in Weed?"
 "Oh, so ya forgot that too, did ya. Well, I ain’t gonna remind ya,
fear ya do it again."
 A light of understanding broke on Lennie’s face. "They run us
outa Weed," he exploded triumphantly.
 "Run us out, hell," said George disgustedly. "We run. They was
lookin’ for us, but they didn’t catch us.
 Lennie giggled happily. "I didn’t forget that, you bet."
 George lay back on the sand and crossed his hands under his
head, and Lennie imitated him, raising his head to see whether he
were doing it right. "God, you’re a lot of trouble," said George. "I
could get along so easy and so nice if I didn’t have you on my tail. I
could live so easy and maybe have a girl."
 For a moment Lennie lay quiet, and then he said hopefully, "We
gonna work on a ranch, George."
 "Awright. You got that. But we’re gonna sleep here because I got
a reason."
 The day was going fast now. Only the tops of the Gabilan
mountains flamed with the light of the sun that hid gone from the
valley. A water snake slipped along on the pool, its head held up
like a little periscope. The reeds jerked slightly in the current. Far
off toward the highway a man shouted something, and another
man shouted back. The sycamore limbs rustled under a little wind
that died immediately.
 "George - why ain’t we goin’ on to the ranch and get some supper?
They got supper at the ranch."
 George rolled on his side. "No reason at all for you. I like it here.
Tomorra we’re gonna go to work I seen thrashin’ machines on the
way down. That means we’ll be bucking grain bags, bustin’ a gut.
Tonight I’m gonna lay right here and look up. I like it."
 Lennie got up on his knees and looked down at George. "Ain’t we
gonna have no supper?"
 "Sure we are, if you gather up some dead willow sticks, I got three
cans of beans in my bindle. You get a fire ready. I’ll give you a
match when you get the sticks together. Then we’ll heat the beans
and have supper."
 Lennie said, "I like beans with ketchup."
 "Well, we ain’t got no ketchup. You go get wood. An’ don’t you fool
around. It’ll be dark before long."
 Lennie lumbered to his feet and disappeared in the brush. George
lay where he was and whistled softly to himself. There were
sounds of splashings down the river in the direction Lennie had
taken. George stopped whistling and listened, "Poor bastard," he
said softly, and then went on whistling again.
 In a moment Lennie came crashing back through the brush. He
carried one small willow stick in his hand. George sat up.
"Awright," he said brusquely. "Gi’me that mouse!"
 But Lennie made an elaborate pantomime of innocence. "What
mouse, George? I ain’t got no mouse."
 George held out his hand. "Come on. Give it to me. You ain’t
puttin’ nothing over."
 Lennie hesitated, backed away, looked wildly at the brush line as
though he contemplated running for his freedom. George said
coldly, "You gonna give me that mouse or do I have to sock you?"
 "Give you what, George?"
 "You know God damn well what. I want that mouse."
 Lennie reluctantly reached into his pocket. His voice broke a
little. "I don’t know why I can’t keep it. It ain’t nobody’s mouse. I
didn’t steal it. I found it lyin’ right beside the road."
 George’s hand remained outstretched imperiously. Slowly, like a
terrier who doesn’t want to bring a ball to its master, Lennie
approached, drew back, approached again. George snapped his
fingers sharply, and at the sound Lennie laid the mouse in his
hand.
 "I wasn’t doin’ nothing bad with it, George. Jus’ strokin’ it."
 George stood up and threw the mouse as far as he could into the
darkening brush, and then he stepped to the pool and washed his
hands. "You crazy fool. Don’t you think I could see your feet was
wet where you went acrost the river to get it?" He heard Lennie’s
whimpering cry and wheeled about. "Blubberin’ like a baby! Jesus
Christ! A big guy like you." Lennie’s lip quivered and tears started
in his eyes. "Aw, Lennie!" George put his hand on Lennie’s
shoulder. "I ain’t takin’ it away jus’ for ' meanness. That mouse
ain’t fresh, Lennie; and besides, you’ve broke it pettin’ it. You get
another mouse that’s fresh and I’ll let you keep it a little while."
 Lennie sat down on the ground and hung his head dejectedly, "I
don’t know where there is no other mouse. I remember a lady used
to give ’em to me - ever’ one she got. But that lady ain’t here."
 George scoffed. "Lady, huh? Don’t even remember who that lady
was. That was your own Aunt Clara. An’ she stopped givin’ ’em to
ya. You always killed ’em."
 Lennie looked sadly up at him. "They was so little," he said,
apologetically. "I’d pet ’em, and pretty soon they bit my fingers
and I pinched their heads a little and then they was dead -
because they was so little.
 "I wish’t we’d get the rabbits pretty soon, George. They ain’t so
little."
 "The hell with the rabbits. An’ you ain’t to be trusted with no live
mice; Your Aunt Clara give you a rubber mouse and you wouldn’t
have nothing to do with it."
 "It wasn’t no good to pet," said Lennie.
 The flame of the sunset lifted from the mountain-tops and dusk
came into the valley, and a half darkness came in among the
willows and the sycamores. A big carp rose to the surface of the
pool, gulped air and then sank mysteriously into the dark water
again, leaving widening rings on the water. Over-head the leaves
whisked again and little puffs of willow cotton blew down and
landed on the pool’s surface,
 "You gonna get that wood?" George demanded. "There’s plenty
right up against the back of that sycamore. Floodwater wood. Now
you get it."
 Lennie went behind the tree and brought out a litter of dried
leaves and twigs. He threw them in a heap on the oldash pile and
went back for more and more. It was almost night now. A dove’s
wings whistled over the water. George walked to the fire pile and
lighted the dry leaves. The flame cracked up among the twigs and
fell to work. George undid his bindle and brought out three cans of
beans. He stood them about the fire, close in against the blaze, but
not quite touching the flame.
 "There’s enough beans for four men," George said.
 Lennie watched him from over the fire. He said patiently, "I like
’em with ketchup."
 "Well, we ain’t got any," George exploded. "Whatever we ain’t got,
that’s what you want. God a’mighty, if I was alone I could live so
easy. I could go get a job an’ work, an’ no trouble. No mess ' all,
and when the end of the month come I coul' take my fifty bucks
and go into town and get what‘ ever I want. Why, I could stay in a
cat house night. I could eat any place I want, hotel or an place,
and order any damn thing I could think of. An’ I could do all that
every damn month. Get a gallon of whisky, or set in a pool room
and play cards or shoot pool." Lennie knelt and looked over the
fire at the angry George. And Lennie’s face was drawn with terror.
"An’ whatta I got," George went on furiously. "I got you! You can’t
keep a job and you lose me ever’ job I get. Jus’ keep me shovin’ all
over the country all the time. An’ that ain’t the,' worst. You get in
trouble. You do bad things and I got m get you out." His voice rose
nearly to a shout. "You crazy son-of-a-bitch. You keep me in hot
water all the time." He took on the elaborate manner of little girls
when they are mimicking one another. "Jus’ wanted to feel that
girl’s dress - jus’ wanted to pet it like it was a mouse - Well, how
the hell did she know you jus’ wanted to feel her dress? She jerks
back and you hold on like it was a mouse. She yells and we got to
hide in a irrigation ditch all day with guys lookin’ for us, and we
got to sneak out in the dark and get outta the country. All the
time somethin’ like that - all the time. I wisht I could put you in a
cage with about a million mice an’ let you have fun." His anger left
him suddenly. He looked across the fire at Lennie’s anguished
face, and then he looked ashamedly at the flames.

 It was quite dark now, but the fire lighted the trunks of the trees
and the curving branches overhead. Lennie crawled slowly and
cautiously around the fire until he was close to George. He sat
back on his heels. George turned the bean cans so that another
side faced the fire. He pretended to be un-aware of Lennie so close
beside him.
 "George," very softly. No answer. "George!"
 "Whatta you want?"
 "I was only foolin’, George. I don’t want no ketchup. I wouldn’t eat
no ketchup if it was right here beside me."
 "If it was here, you could have some."
 "But I wouldn’t eat none, George. I’d leave it all for you. You could
cover your beans with it and I wouldn’t touch none of it."
 George still stared morosely at the fire. "When I think of the swell
time I could have without you, I go nuts. I never get no peace."
 Lennie still knelt. He looked off into the darkness across the
river, "George, you want I should go away and leave you alone?"
 "Where the hell could you go?"
 "Well, I could. I could go off in the hills there. Some place I’d find
a cave."
 "Yeah' How’d you eat. You ain’t got sense enough to find nothing
to eat."
 "I’d find things, George. I don’t need no nice food with ketchup. I’d
lay out in the sun and nohody’d hurt me; An’ if I foun’ a mouse, I
could keep it. Nobody’d take it away from me."
 George looked quickly and searchingly at him. "I been mean, ain’t
I?"
 "If you don’ want me I can go off in the hills an’ find a cave. I can
go away any time."
 "No - look! I was jus’ foolin’, Lennie. ’Cause'. I want you to stay
with me. Trouble with mice is you always kill ’em." He paused.
"Tell you what I’ll do, Lennie. First chance I get I'll give you a pup.
Maybe you wouldn’t killit. That’d be better than. mice. And you
could pet it harder."
 Lennie avoided the bait. He had sensed his advantage, "If you
don’t want me, you only jus’ got to say so, and I’ll go off in those
hills right there - right up in those hills and live by myself. An’ I
won’t get no mice stole from me."
 George said, "I want you to stay with me, Lennie. Jesus Christ,
somebody’d shoot you for a coyote if you was by yourself. No, you
stay with me. Your Aunt Clara wouldn’t like you running off by
yourself, even if she is dead."
 Lennie spoke craftily, "Tell me - like you done before."
 "Tell you what?"
 "About the rabbits."
 George snapped, "You ain’t gonna put nothing over on me."
 Lennie pleads "Come on, George. Tell me. Please, George. Like
you done before."
 "You get a kick outta that, don’t you? Awright, I’ll tell you, and
then we’ll eat our supper...."
 George’s voice became deeper. He repeated his words
rhythmically as though he had said them many times before.
"Guys like us, that work on ranches, are the loneliest guys in the
world. They got no family. They don’t belong no place. They come
to a ranch an’ work up a stake and then they go inta town and
blow their stake, and the first thing you know they’re poundin’
their tail on some other ranch. They ain’t got nothing to look
ahead to."
 Lennie was delighted. "That’s it - that’s it. Now tell how it is with
us."
 George went on. "With us it ain’t like that. We got a future. We
got somebody to talk to that gives a damn about us. We don’t have
to sit in no bar room blowin’ our jack jus’ because we got no place
else to go. If them other guys gets in jail they can rot for all
anybody gives a damn. But not us."
 Lennie broke in."But not us! An’ why? Because .... because I got
you to look after me, and you got me to look after you, and that’s
why." He laughed delightedly. "Go on now, George!"
 "You got it by heart. You can do it yourself."
 "No, you. I forget some a’ the things. Tell about how it’s gonna
be."
 "O.K. Someday - we’re gonna get the jack together and we’re
gonna have a little house and a couple of acres an’ a cow and some
pigs and -"
 "An’ live off the fatta the lan’,"Lennie shouted. "An’ haverabbits.
Go on, George! Tell about what we’re gonna have in the garden
and about the rabbits in the cages and about the rain in the
winter and the stove, and how thick the cream is an the milk like
you can hardly cut it. Tell about that, George."
 "Why’n’t you do it yourself? You know all of it."
 "No.... you tell it. It ain’t the same if I tell it. Go on.... George.
How I get to tend the rabbits."
 "Well," said George, "we’ll have a big vegetable patch and a rabbit
hutch and chickens. And when it rains in the winter, we’ll just say
the hell with goin’ to work, and we’ll build up a fire in the stove
and set around it an’ listen to the rain comin’ down on the roof -
Nuts!" He took out his pocket knife. "I ain’t got time for no more."
He drove his knife through the top of one of the bean cans, sawed
out the top and passed the can to Lennie. Then he opened a second
can. From his side pocket he brought out two spoons and passed
one of them to Lennie.
 They sat by the fire and filled their mouths with beans and
chewed mightily. A few beans slipped out of the side of Lennie’s
mouth. George gestured with his spoon. "What you gonna say
tomorrow when the boss asks you questions?"
 Lennie stopped chewing and swallowed. His face was
concentrated. "I.... I ain’t gonna.... say a word."
 "Good boy! That’s fine, Lennie! Maybe you’re gettin’ better. When
we get the coupla acres I can let you tend the rabbits all right.
’Specially if you remember as good as that."
 Lennie choked with pride. "I can remember," he said.
 George motioned with his spoon again. "Look, Lennie. I want you
to look around here. You can remember this place, can’t you? The
ranch is about a quarter mile up that way. Just follow the river?"
 "Sure," said Lennie. "I can remember this. Di’n’t I remember
about not gonna say a word?"
 "’Course you did. Well, look Lennie - if you jus’ happen to get in
trouble like you always done be fore, I want you to come right here
an’ hide in the brush."
 "Hide in the brush," said Lennie slowly.
 "Hide in the brush till I come for you. Can you remember that?"
 "Sure I can, George. Hide in the brush till you come."
 "But you ain’t gonna get in no trouble, because if you do, I won’t
let you tend the rabbits." He threw his empty bean can off into the
brush.
 "I won’t get in no trouble, George. I ain’t gonna say a word."
 "O.K. Bring your bindle over here by the fire. It’s gonna be nice
sleepin’ here. Lookin’ up, and the leaves. Don’t build up no more
fire. We’ll let her die down."
 They made their beds on the sand, and as the blaze dropped from
the fire the sphere of light grew smaller; the curling branches
disappeared and only a faint glimmer showed where the tree
trunks were. From the darkness Lennie called, "George - you
asleep?"
 "No. Whatta you want?"
 "Let’s have different color rabbits, George."
 "Sure we will," George said sleepily. "Red and blue and green
rabbits, Lennie. Millions of ’em."
 "Furry ones, George, like I seen in the fair in Sacramento."
 "Sure, furry ones."
 "’Cause I can jus’ as well go away, George, an’, live in a cave."
 "You can jus’ as well go to hell," said George. "Shut up now."
 The red light dimmed on the coals. Up the hill from the river a
coyote hammered, and a dog answered from the other side of the
stream. The sycamore leaves whispered in a little night breeze.
THE bunk house was a long, rectangular building. Inside, the
walls were whitewashed and the floor unpainted. In three walls
there were small, square windows, and in the fourth, a solid door
with a wooden larch. Against the walls were eight bunks, five of
them made up with blankets and the other three showing their
burlap ticking. Over each bunk there was nailed an apple box with
the opening forward so that it made two shelves for the personal
belongings of the occupant of the bunk. And these shelves were
loaded with little articles soap and talcum powder, razors and
those Western magazines ranch men love to read and scoff at and
secretly believe. And there were medicines on the shelves, and
little vials, combs; and from nails on the box sides, a few neckties.
Near one wall there was a black cast-iron stove, its stovepipe
going straight up through the ceiling. In the middle of the room
stood a big square table littered with playing cards, and around it
were grouped boxes for the players to sit on.
 At about ten o’clock in the morning the sun threw a bright dustladen bar through one of the side windows, and in and out of the
beam flies shot like rushing stars.
 The wooden latch raised. The door opened and a tall, stoopshouldered old man came in. He was dressed in blue jeans and he
carried a big push broom in his left hand. Behind him came
George, and behind George, Lennie.
 "The boss was expectin’ you last night," the old man said. "He was
sore as hell when you wasn’t here to go out this morning." He
pointed with right arm, and out of the sleeve came a round stick
like wrist, but no hand. "You can have them two beds there," he
said, indicating two bunks near the stove.
 George stepped over and threw his blankets do on the burlap sack
of straw that was a mattress. He looked into his box shelf and
then picked a small yellow can from it. "Say. What the hell’s this?"
 "I don’t know," said the old man.
 "Says ‘positively kills lice, roaches and other:, scourges.’ What the
hell kind of bed you giving us, anyways. We don’t want no pants
rabbits."
 The old swamper shifted his broom and held it between his elbow
and his side while he held out his hand for the can. He studied the
label carefully. "Tell you what -" he said finally, "last guy that
hadthis bed was a blacksmith - hell of a nice fella and clean a guy
as you want to meet. Used to wash his hands evenafter he ate."
 "Then how come he got graybacks?" George working up a slow
anger. Lennie put his bindle on the neighboring bunk and sat
down. He watched George with open mouth.
 "Tell you what," said the old swamper. "This here blacksmith -
name of Whitey - was the kind of guy that would put that stuff
around even if there wasn’t no bugs - just to make sure, see? Tell
you what he used to do - At meals he’d peel his boil’ potatoes, an’
he’d take out ever’ little spot, no matter what kind, before he’d eat
it. And if there was a red splotch on an egg, he’d scrape it off.
Finally quit about the food. That’s the kinda guy he was - clean.
Used ta dress up Sundays even when he wasn’t going no place, put
on a necktie even, and then set in the bunk house."
 "I ain’t so sure," said George skeptically. "What did you say he
quit for?"
 The old man put the yellow can in his pocket, and he rubbed his
bristly white whiskers with his knuckles. "Why.... he.... just quit,
the way a guy will. Says it was the food. Just wanted to move.
Didn’t give no other reason but the food. Just says ‘gimme my
time’ one night, the way any guy would."
 George lifted his tick and looked underneath it, He leaned over
and inspected the sacking closely. Immediately Lennie got up and
did the same with his bed. Finally George seemed satisfied. He
unrolled his bindle and put things on the shelf, his razor and bar
of soap, his comb and bottle of pills, his liniment and leather
wristband. Then he made his bed up neatly with blankets. The old
man said, "I guess the boss’ll be out here in a minute. He was sure
burned when you wasn’t here this morning. Come right in when
we was eatin’ breakfast and says, ‘Where the hell’s them new
men?’ An’ he give the stable buck hell, too."
 George patted a wrinkle out of his bed, and sat ' down. "Give the
stable buck hell?" he asked.
 "Sure. Ya see the stable buck’s a nigger."
 "Nigger, huh?"
 "Yeah. Nice fella too. Got a crooked back where. a horse kicked
him. The boss gives him hell when he’s mad. But the stable buck
don’t give a damn about that. He reads a lot. Got books in his
room."
 "What kind of a guy is the boss?" George asked.
 "Well, he’s a pretty nice fella. Gets pretty mad sometimes, but
he’s pretty nice. Tell ya what - know what he done Christmas?
Brang a gallon of whisky right in here and say "‘Drink hearty
boys. Christmas comes but once a year.’"
 "The hell he did! Whole gallon?"
 "Yes sir. Jesus, we had fun. They let the nigger come in that
night. Little skinner name of Smithy took after the nigger. Done
pretty good, too. The guys wouldn’t let him use his feet, so the
nigger got him. If he coulda used his feet, Smitty says he woulda
killed the nigger. The guys said on account of the nigger’s got a
crooked back, Smitty can’t use his feet." He paused in relish of the
memory. "After that the guys went into Soledad and raised hell,
didn’t go in there. I ain’t got the poop no more."
 Lennie was just finishing making his bed. The wooden latch
raised again and the door opened. A little stocky man stood in the
open doorway. He wore blue jean trousers, a flannel shirt, a black,
unbuttoned vest and a black coat. His thumbs were stuck in his
belt, on each side of a square steel buckle. On his head was a
soiled brown Stetson hat, and he wore high-heeled boots and spurs
to prove he was not a laboring man.
 The old swamper looked quickly at him, and then shuffled to the
door rubbing his whiskers with his knuckles as he went. "Them
guys just come," he said, and shuffled past the boss and out the
door.
 The boss stepped into the room with the short, quick steps of a
fat-legged man. "I wrote Murray and Ready I wanted two men this
morning. You got your work slips?" George reached into his pocket
and produced the slips and handed them to the boss. "It wasn’t
Murray, and Ready’s fault. Says right here on the slip that you
was to be here for work this morning."
 George looked down at his feet. "Bus driver give us a bum steer,"
he said. "We hadda walk ten miles. Says we was here when we
wasn’t. We couldn’t get no rides in the morning."
 The boss squinted his eyes. "Well, I had to send out the grain
teams short two buckers. Won’t do any good to go out now till after
dinner." He pulled his time book out of his pocket and opened it
where a pencil was stuck between the leaves. George scowled
meaningfully at Lennie, and Lennie nodded to show that he
understood. The boss licked his pencil. "What’s your name?"
 "George Milton."
 "And what’s yours?"
 George said, "His name’s Lennie Small."
 The names were entered in the book. "Le’s see, this is the
twentieth, noon the twentieth." He closed the book. "Where you
boys been working?"
 "Up around Weed," said George.
 "You, too?" to Lennie.
 "Yeah, him too," said George.
 The boss pointed a playful finger at Lennie." He ain’t much of a
talker, is he?"
 "No, he ain’t, but he’s sure a hell of a good worker. Strong as a
bull."
 Lennie smiled to himself. "Strong as a bull," he repeated. George
scowled at him, and Lennie dropped his head in shame at having
forgotten.
 The boss said suddenly, "Listen, Small!" Lennie raised his head.
What can you do?"
 In a panic, Lennie looked at George for help. "He can do anything
you.tell him," said George. "He’ a good skinner. He can rassel
grain bags, drive cultivator. He can do anything. Just give him a
try."
 The boss turned on George. "Then why don’t you let him answer?
What are you trying to put over?"
 George broke in loudly, "Oh! I ain’t saying he’s bright. He ain’t,
But I say he’s a God damn good worker. He can put up a four
hundred pound bale."
 The boss deliberately put the little book in his pocket. He hooked
his thumbs in his belt and squinted one eye nearly closed. "Say -
what you sellin'?"
 "Huh'"
 "I said what stake you got in this guy? You takin’
 his pay away from him?"
 "No, ’course I ain’t. Why ya think I’m sellin’ him out?"
 "Well, I never seen one guy take so much trouble for another guy.
I just like to know what your interest is."
 George said, "He’s my.... cousin. I told his old lady I’d take care of
him. He got kicked in the head by a horse when he was a kid, He’s
awright. Just ain’t bright. But he can do anything you tell him."
 The boss turned half away. "Well, God knows be don’t need any
brains to buck barley bags. Rut don’t you try to put nothing over,
Milton. I got my eye on you. Why’d you quit in Weed?"
 "Job was done," said George promptly.
 "What kinda job?"
 "We.... we was diggin’ a cesspool."
 "All right. But don’t try to put nothing over, ’cause you can’t get
away with nothing. I seen wise guys before. Go on out with the
grain teams after dinner. They’re pickin’ up barley at the
threshing machine. Go out with Slim’s team."
 "Slim?"
 "Yeah. Big tall skinner. You’ll see him at dinner." He turned
abruptly and went to the door, but before he went out he turned
and looked for a long moment at the two men.
 When the sound of his footsteps had died away George turned on
Lennie. "So you wasn’t gonna say a word. You was gonna leave
your big flapper shut and leave me do the talkin’. Damn near lost
us the job."
 Lennie stared hopelessly at his hands. "I forgot George."
 "Yeah, you forgot. You always forget, an’ I got to talk you out of
it." He sat down heavily on. the bunk. "Now he’s got his eye on us.
Now we got to be careful and not make no slips. You keep your big
Rapper shut after this." He fell morosely silent.
 "George."
 "What you want now?"
 "I wasn’t kicked in the head with no horse, was I, George?"
 "Be a damn good thing if you was," George said viciously. "Save
ever’body a hell of a lot of trouble."
 "You said I was your cousin, George."
 "Well, that was a lie. An’ I’m damn glad it was. If I was a relative
of yours I’d shoot myself." He stopped suddenly, stepped to the
open front door and peered out. "Say, what the hell you doin'
litenin’?"
 The old man came slowly into the room. He had his broom in his
hand. And at his heels there walked a dragfooted sheepdog, gray
of muzzle, and with pale, blind old eyes. The dog struggled lamely
to .i the side of the room and lay down, grunting softly i to himself
and licking his grizzled, moth-eaten coat. The swamper watched
him until he was settled. "I wasn’t listenin’. I was jus’ standin’ in
the shade a minute scratchin’ my dog. I jus’ now finished
swampin' out the wash house."
 "You was pokin’ your big ears into our business," George said. "I
don’t like nobody to get nosey."
 The old man looked uneasily from George to Lennie, and then
back "I jus’ come there," he said. "I didn’t hear nothing you guys
was sayin’. I ain’t interested in nothing you was sayin’. A guy on a
ranch don’t never listen nor he don’t ast no questions."
 "Damn right he don’t," said George, slightly mollified, "not if he
wants to stay. workin’ long." Rut he was reassured by the
swamper’s defense. "Come on in and set down a minute," he said.
"That’s a hell of an old dog."
 "Yeah. I had ’im ever since he was a pup. God, he was a good
sheep dog when he was younger." He stood his broom against the
wall and he rubbed his white bristled cheek with his knuckles.
"How’d you like the boss?" he asked.
 "Pretty good. Seemed awright."
 "He’s a nice fella," the swamper agreed. "You got to take him
right."
 At that moment a young man came into the bunk house; a thin
young man with a brown face, with brown eyes and a head of
tightly curled hair. He wore a work glove on his left hand, and,
like the boss, he wore high-heeled boots, "Seen my old man?" he
asked.
 The swamper said, "He was here jus’ a minute ago, Curley. Went
over to the cook house, I think."
 "I’ll try to catch him," said Curley. His eyes passed over the new
men and he stopped. He glanced coldly at George and then at
Lennie. His arms gradually bene at the elbows and his hands
closed into fists. He stiffened and went into a slight crouch. His
glance was at once calculating and pugnacious. Lennie squirmed
under the look and shifted his feet nervously. Curley stepped
gingerly close to him. "You the new guys the old man was waitin'
for?"
 "We just come in," said George.
 "Let the big gay talk."
 Lennie twisted with embarrassment.
 George said, "S’pose he don't want to talk?"
 Curley lashed his body around. "By Christ,' he's gotta talk when
he’s spoke to. What the hell are you gettin’ into it for?"
 "We travel together," said George coldly.
 "Oh, so it’s that way."
 George was tense, and motionless. "Yeah, it’s that way."
 Lennie was looking helplessly to George for instruction.
 "An’ yon won’t let the big guy talk, is that it?"
 "He can talk if he wants to tell you anything." He nodded slightly
to Lennie.
 "We jus’ come in," said Lennie softly.
 Curley stared levelly at him. "Well, nex’ time you answer when
you’re spoke to." He turned toward the door and walked out, and
his elbows were bent out a little.
 George watched him out, and then he turned back to the
swamper. "Say, what the hell’s he got on his shoulder? Lennie
didn’t do nothing to him."
 The old man looked cautiously at the door to make sure no one
was listening. "That’s the boss’s son," he said quietly. "Curley’s
pretty handy. He done quite a bit in the ring. He’s a lightweight,
and he’s handy."
 "Well, let him be handy," said George, "He don’t have to take after
Lennie. Lennie didn’t do nothing to him. What’s he got against
Lennie?"
 The swamper considered..... "Well.... tell you what. Curley’s like a
lot of little guys. He hates big guys. He’s alla time picking scraps
with big guys. Kind of like he's mad at ’em because he ain’t a big
guy. You seen little guys like that, ain’t you? Always scrappy?"
 "Sure," said George. "I seen plenty tough little guys. But this
Curley better not make no mistakes about Lennie. Lennie ain’t
handy, but this Curley punk is gonna get' hurt if he messes
around with Lennie."
 "Well, Curley’s pretty handy," the swamper said skeptically.
"Never did seem right to me. S'pose Curley jumps a big guy an’
licks him. Ever’body says what a game guy Curley is. And s’pose
he does the same thing and gets licked. Then ever’body says the
big guy oughtta pick somebody his own size, and maybe they gang
up on the big guy. Never did seem right to me. Seems like Curley
ain’t givin’ nobody a chance."
 George was watching the door. He said ominously, "Well, he
better watch out for Lennie. Lennie ain’t no fighter, but Lennie’s
strong and quick, and Lennie don’t know no rules." He walked to
the square table and sat down on one of the boxes. He gathered
some of the cards together and shuffled them.
 The old man sat down on another box. "Don’t tell Curley I said
none of this. He’d slough me. He just don’t give a damn. Won’t
ever get canned ’cause his old man’s the boss."
 George cut the cards and began turning them over, looking at
each one and throwing it down on a pile. He said, "This guy Curley
sounds like a son-of-a-bitch to me. I don’t like mean little guys."
 "Seems to me like he’s worse lately," said the swamper. "He got
married a couple of weeks ago. Wife lives over in the boss’s house.
Seems like CurIey is cockier’n ever since he got married."
 George grunted, "Maybe he’s showin’ off for his wife."
 The swamper warmed to his gossip. "You seen that glove on his
left hand?"
 "Yeah. I seen it."
 "Well, that glove’s fulla vaseline."
 "Vaseline? What the hell for?"
 "Well, I tell ya what - Curley says he’s keepin’ that hand soft for
his wife."
 George studied the cards absorbedly. "That’s a dirty thing to tell
around," he said.
 The old man was reassured. He had drawn a derogatory
statement from George. He felt safe now, and be spoke more
confidently. "Wait'll you see Curley's wife."
 George cut the cards again and put out a solitaire lay, slowly and
deliberately. "Purty?" he asked casually.
 "Yeah. Purty . . . . but-"
 George studied his cards. "But what?"
 "Well--she got the eye."
 "Yeah? Married two weeks and got the eye? Maybe that's why
Curley's pants is full of ants."
 "I seen her give Slim the eye. Slim's a jerkline skinner. Hell of a
nice fella. Slim don't need to wear no high-heeled boots on a grain
team. I seen her give Slim the eye. Curley never seen it. An' I seen
her give Carlson the eye."
 George pretended a lack of interest. "Looks like we was gonna
have fun."
 The swamper stood up from his box. "Know what I think?" George
did not answer. "Well, I think Curley's married . . . . a tart."
 "He ain't the first," said George. "There's plenty done that."
 The old man moved toward the door, and his ancient dog lifted his
head and peered about, and then got painfully to his feet to follow.
"I gotta be settin' out the wash basins for the guys. The teams'll be
in before long. You guys gonna buck barley?"
 "Yeah."
 "You won't tell Curley nothing I said?"
 "Hell no."
 "Well, you look her over, mister. You see if she ain't a tart." He
stepped out the door into the brilliant sunshine.
 George laid down his cards thoughtfully, turned his piles of three.
He built four clubs on his ace pile. The sun square was on the floor
now, and the flies whipped through it like sparks. A sound of
jingling harness and the croak of heavy-laden axles sounded from
outside. From the distance came a clear call. "Stable Buck--ooh,
sta-able Buck!" And then, " Where the hell is that God damn
nigger?"
 George stared at his solitaire lay, and then he flounced the cards
together and turned around to Lennie. Lennie was lying down on
the bunk watching him.
 "Look, Lennie! This here ain't no set up. I'm scared. You gonna
have trouble with that Curley guy. I seen that kind before. He was
kinda feelin' you out. He figures he's got you scared and he's
gonna take a sock at you the first chance he gets."
 Lennie's eyes were frightened. "I don't want no trouble," he said
plaintively. "Don't let him sock me, George."
 George got up and went over to Lennie's bunk and sat down on it.
"I hate that kinda bastard," he said. "I seen plenty of 'em. Like the
old guy says, Curley don't take no chances. He always wins." He
thought for a moment. "If he tangles with you, Lennie, we're
gonna get the can. Don't make no mistake about that. He's the
boss's son. Look, Lennie. You try to keep away from him, will you?
Don't never speak to him. If he comes in here you move clear to
the other side of the room. Will you do that, Lennie?"
 "I don't want no trouble," Lennie mourned. "I never done nothing
to him."
 "Well, that won't do you no good if Curley wants to plug himself
up for a fighter. Just don't have nothing to do with him. Will you
remember?"
 "Sure, George. I ain't gonna say a word."
 The sound of the approaching grain teams was louder, thud of big
hooves on hard ground, drag of brakes and the jingle of trace
chains. Men were calling back and forth from the teams. George,
sitting on the bunk beside Lennie, frowned as he thought Lennie
asked timidly, "You ain't mad, George?"
 "I ain't mad at you. I'm mad at this here Curley bastard. I hoped
we was gonna get a little stake together-maybe a hundred
dollars." His tone grew decisive. "You keep away from Curley,
Lennie."
 "Sure I will, George. I won't say a word."
 "Don't let him pull you in-but-if the son-of-abitch socks you-let 'im
have it."
 "Let 'im have what, George?"
 "Never mind, never mind. I'll tell you when. I hate that kind of a
guy. Look, Lennie, if you get in any kind of trouble, you remember
what I told you to do?"
 Lennie raised up on his elbow. His face contorted with thought.
Then his eyes moved sadly to George's face. "If I get in any
trouble, you ain't gonna let me tend the rabbits."
 "That's not what I meant. You remember where we slep' last
night? Down by the river?"
 "Yeah. I remember. Oh, sure I remember! I go there an' hide in
the brush."
 "Hide till I come for you. Don't let nobody see you. Hide in the
brush by the river. Say that over."
 "Hide in the brush by the river, down in the brush by the river."
 "If you get in trouble."
 "If I get in trouble."
 A brake screeched outside. A call came, "StableBuck. Oh! Sta-able
Buck."
 George said, "Say it over to yourself, Lennie, so you won't forget
it."
 Both men glanced up, for the rectangle of sunshine in the
doorway was cut off. A girl was standing there looking in. She had
full, rouged lips and wide-spaced eyes, heavily made up. Her
fingernails were red. Her hair hung in little rolled clusters, like
sausages. She wore a cotton house dress and red mules, on the
insteps of which were little bouquets of red ostrich feathers. "I'm
lookin' for Curley," she said. Her voice had a nasal, brittle quality.
 George looked away from her and then back. "He was in here a
minute ago, but he went."
 "Oh!" She put her hands behind her back and leaned against the
door frame so that her body was thrown forward. "You're the new
fellas that just come, ain't ya?"
 "Yeah."
 Lennie's eyes moved down over her body, and though she did not
seem to be looking at Lennie she bridled a little. She looked at her
fingernails. "Sometimes Curley's in here," she explained.
 George said brusquely, "Well he ain't now."
 "If he ain't, I guess I better look some place else," she said
playfully.
 Lennie watched her, fascinated. George said, "If I see him, I'll
pass the word you was looking for him.
 She smiled archly and twitched her body. "Nobody can't blame a
person for lookin'," she said. There were footsteps behind her,
going by. She turned her head. "Hi, Slim," she said.
 Slim's voice came through the door. "Hi, Goodlookin'."
 "I'm tryin' to find Curley, Slim."
 "Well, you ain't tryin' very hard. I seen him goin' in your house."
 She was suddenly apprehensive. "Bye, boys," she called into the
bunk house, and she hurried away.
 George looked around at Lennie. "Jesus, what a tramp," he said.
"So that's what Curley picks for a wife."
 "She's purty," said Lennie defensively.
 "Yeah, and she's sure hidin' it. Curley got his work ahead of him.
Bet she'd clear out for twenty bucks."
 Lennie still stared at the doorway where she had been. "Gosh, she
was purty." He smiled admiringly. George looked quickly down at
him and then he took him by an ear and shook him.
 "Listen to me, you crazy bastard," he said fiercely. "Don't you
even take a look at that bitch. I don't care what she says and what
she does. I seen 'em poison before, but I never seen no piece of jail
bait worse than her. You leave her be."
 Lennie tried to disengage his ear. "I never done nothing, George."
 "No, you never. But when she was standin' in the doorway
showin' her legs, you wasn't lookin' the other way, neither."
 "I never meant no harm, George. Honest I never."
 "Well, you keep away from her, 'cause she's a rattrap if I ever
seen one. You let Curley take the rap. He let himself in for it.
Glove fulla vaseline," George said disgustedly. "An' I bet he's eatin'
raw eggs and writin' to the patent medicine houses."
 Lennie cried out suddenly-"I don' like this place, George. This
ain't no good place. I wanna get outa here."
 "We gotta keep it till we get a stake. We can't help it, Lennie.
We'll get out jus' as soon as we can. I don't like it no better than
you do." He went back to the table and set out a new solitaire
hand. "No, I don't like it," he said. "For two bits I'd shove out of
here. If we can get jus' a few dollars in the poke we'll shove off and
go up the American River and pan gold. We can make maybe a
couple of dollars a day there, and we might hit a pocket."
 Lennie leaned eagerly toward him. "Le's go, George. Le's get outta
here. It's mean here."
 "We gotta stay," George said shortly. "Shut up now. The guys'll be
cumin' in."
 From the washroom nearby came the sound of running water and
rattling basins. George studied the cards. "Maybe we oughtta
wash up," he said. "But we ain't done nothing to get dirty."
 A tall man stood in the doorway. He held a crushed Stetson hat
under his arm while he combed his long, black, damp hair straight
back. Like the others he wore blue jeans and a short denim jacket.
When he had finished combing his hair he moved into the room,
and he moved with a majesty only achieved by royalty and master
craftsmen. He was a jerkline skinner, the prince of the ranch,
capable of driving ten, sixteen, even twenty mules with a single
line to the leaders. He was capable of killing a fly on the wheeler's
butt with a bull whip without touching the mule. There was a
gravity in his manner and a quiet so profound that all talk
stopped when he spoke. His authority was so great that his word
was taken on any subject, be it politics or love. This was Slim, the
jerkline skinner. His hatchet face was ageless. He might have
been thirty-five or fifty. His ear heard more than was said to him,
and his slow speech had overtones not of thought, but of
understanding beyond thought. His hands, large and lean, were as
delicate in their action as those of a temple dancer.
 He smoothed out his crushed hat, creased it in the middle and put
it on. He looked kindly at the two in the bunk house. "It's
brighter'n a bitch outside," he said gently. "Can't hardly see
nothing in here. You the new guys?"
 "Just come," said George.
 "Gonna buck barley?"
 "That's what the boss says."
 Slim sat down on a box across the table from
 George. He studied the solitaire hand that was upside down to
him. "Hope you get on my team," he said. His voice was very
gentle. "I gotta pair of punks on my team that don't know a barley
bag from a blue ball. You guys ever bucked any barley?"
 "Hell, yes," said George. "I ain't nothing to scream about, but that
big bastard there can put up more grain alone than most pairs
can."
 Lennie, who had been following the conversation back and forth
with his eyes, smiled complacency at the compliment. Slim looked
approvingly at George for having given the compliment. He leaned
over the table and snapped the corner of a loose card. "You guys
travel around together?" His tone was friendly. It invited
confidence without demanding it.
 "Sure," said George. "We kinda look after each other." He
indicated Lennie with his thumb. "He ain't bright. Hell of a good
worker, though. Hell of a nice fella, but he ain't bright. I've knew
him for a long time."
 Slim looked through George and beyond him. "Ain't many guys
travel around together," he mused. "I don't know why. Maybe
ever'body in the whole damn world is scared of each other."
 "It's a lot nicer to go around with a guy you know," said George.
 A powerful, big-stomached man came into the bunk house. His
head still dripped water from the scrubbing and dousing. "Hi,
Slim," he said, and then stopped and stared at George and Lennie.
 "These guys jus' come," said Slim by way of introduction.
 "Glad to meet ya," the big man said. "My name's Carlson."
 "I'm George Milton. This here's Lennie Small."
 "Glad to meet ya," Carlson said again. "He ain't very small." He
chuckled softly at his joke. "Ain't small at all," he repeated.
"Meant to ask you, Slim-how's your bitch? I seen she wasn't under
your wagon this morning."
 "She slang her pups last night," said Slim. "Nine of 'em. I
drowned four of 'em right off. She couldn't feed that many."
 "Got five left, huh?"
 "Yeah, five. I kept the biggest"
 "What kinda dogs you think they're gonna be?"
 "I dunno," said Slim. "Some kinda shepherds, I guess. That's the
most kind I seen around here when she was in heat."
 Carlson went on, "Got five pups, huh. Gonna keep all of 'em?"
 "I dunno. Have to keep 'em a while so they can drink Lulu's milk."
 Carlson said thoughtfully, "Well, looka here, Slim. I been thinkin'.
That dog of Candy's is so God damn old he can't hardly walk.
Stinks like hell, too. Ever' time he comes into the bunk house I can
smell him for two, three days. Why'n't you get Candy to shoot his
old dog and give him one of the pups to raise up? I can smell that
dog a mile away. Got no teeth, damn near blind, can't eat. Candy
feeds him milk. He can't chew nothing else."
 George had been staring intently at Slim. Suddenly a triangle
began to ring outside, slowly at first and then faster and faster
until the beat of it disappeared into one ringing sound. It stopped
as suddenly as it had started.
 "There she goes," said Carlson.
 Outside, there was a burst of voices as a group of men went by.
 Slim stood up slowly and with dignity. "You guys better come on
while they's still something to eat. Won't be nothing left in a
couple of minutes."
 Carlson stepped back to let Slim precede him, an then the two of
them went out the door.
 Lennie was watching George excitedly. George rumpled his cards
into a messy pile. "Yeah!" George said, "I heard him, Lennie. I'll
ask him."
 "A brown and white one," Lennie cried excitedly.
 "Come on. Le's get dinner. I don't know whether he got a brown
and white one."
 Lennie didn't move from his bunk. "You ask him right away,
George, so he won't kill no more of em."
 "Sure. Come on now, get up on your feet."
 Lennie rolled off his bunk and stood up, and the two of them
started for the door. Just as they reached it, Curley bounced in.
 "You seen a girl around here?" he demanded angrily.
 George said coldly. "'Bout half an hour ago maybe."
 "Well what the hell was she doin'?"
 George stood still, watching the angry little man. He said
insultingly, "She said--she was lookin' for you."
 Curley seemed really to see George for the first time. His eyes
flashed over George, took in his height, measured his reach,
looked at his trim middle. "Well, which way'd she go?" he
demanded at last.
 "I dunno," said George. "I didn' watch her go."
 Curley scowled at him, and turning, hurried out the door.
 George said, "Ya know, Lennie, I'm scared I'm gonna tangle with
that bastard myself. I hate his guts. Jesus Christ! Come on. They
won't be a damn thing left to eat."
 They went out the door. The sunshine lay in a thin line under the
window. From a distance there could be heard a rattle of dishes.
 After a moment the ancient dog walked lamely in through the
open door. He gazed about with mild, half-blind eyes. He sniffed,
and then lay down and put his head between his paws. Curley
popped into the doorway again and stood looking into the room.
The dog raised his head, but when Curley jerked out, the grizzled
head sank to the floor again.
ALTHOUGH there was evening brightness showing through the
windows of the bunk house, inside it was dusk. Through the open
door came the thuds and occasional clangs of a horseshoe game,
and now and then the sound of voices raised in approval or
derision.
 Slim and George came into the darkening bunk house together.
Slim reached up over the card table and turned on the tin-shaded
electric light. Instantly the table was brilliant with light, and the
cone of the shade threw its brightness straight downward, leaving
the corners of the bunk house still in dusk. Slim sat down on a box
and George took his place opposite.
 "It wasn't nothing," said Slim. "I would of had to drowned most of
'em anyways. No need to thank me about that."
 George said, "It wasn't much to you, maybe, but it was a hell of a
lot to him. Jesus Christ, I don't know how we're gonna get him to
sleep in here. He'll want to sleep right out in the barn with 'em.
We'll have trouble keepin' him from getting right in the box with
them pups."
 "It wasn't nothing," Slim repeated. "Say, you sure was right about
him. Maybe he ain't bright, but I never seen such a worker. He
damn near killed his partner buckin' barley. There ain't nobody
can keep up with him. God awmighty I never seen such a strong
guy."
 George spoke proudly. "Jus' tell Lennie what to do an' he'll do it if
it don't take no figuring. He can't think of nothing to do himself,
but he sure can take orders."
 There was a clang of horseshoe on iron stake outside and a little
cheer of voices.
 Slim moved back slightly so the light was not on his face. "Funny
how you an' him string along together." It was Slim's calm
invitation to confidence.
 "What's funny about it?" George demanded defensively.
 "Oh, I dunno. Hardly none of the guys ever travel together. I
hardly never seen two guys travel together. You know how the
hands are, they just come in and get their bunk and work a
month, and then they quit and go out alone. Never seem to give a
damn about nobody. It jus' seems kinda funny a cuckoo like him
and a smart little guy like you travelin' together."
 "He ain't no cuckoo," said George. "He's dumb as hell, but he ain't
crazy. An' I ain't so bright neither, or I wouldn't be buckin' barley
for my fifty and found. If I was bright, if I was even a little bit
smart, I'd have my own little place, an' I'd be bringin' in my own
crops, 'stead of doin' all the work and not getting what comes up
outa the ground." George fell silent. He wanted to talk. Slim
neither encouraged nor discouraged him. He just sat back quiet
and receptive.
 "It ain't so funny, him an' me goin' aroun' together," George said
at last. "Him and me was both born in Auburn. I knowed his Aunt
Clara. She took him when he was a baby and raised him up. When
his Aunt Clara died, Lennie just come along with me out workin'.
Got kinda used to each other after a little while."
 "Umm," said Slim.
 George looked over at Slim and saw the calm, Godlike eyes
fastened on him. "Funny," said George. "I used to have a hell of a
lot of fun with 'im. Used to play jokes on 'im 'cause he was too
dumb to take care of 'imself. But he was too dumb even to know he
had a joke played on him. I had fun. Made me seem God damn
smart alongside of him. Why he'd do any damn thing I tol' hits. If I
tol' him to walk over a cliff, over he'd go. That wasn't so damn
much fun after a while. He never got mad about it, neither. I've
beat the hell outa him, and he coulda bust every bone in my body
jus' with his han's, but he never lifted a finger against me."
George's voice was taking on the tone of confession. "Tell you what
made me stop that. One day a bunch of guys was standin' around
up on the Sacramento River. I was feelin' pretty smart. I turns to
Lennie and says, 'Jump in.' An' he jumps. Couldn't swim a stroke.
He damn near drowned before we could get him. An' he was so
damn nice to me for pullin' him out. Clean forgot I told him to
jump in. Well, I ain't done nothing like that no more."
 "He's a nice fella," said Slim. "Guy don't need no sense to be a nice
fella. Seems to me sometimes it jus' works the other way around.
Take a real smart guy and he ain't hardly ever a nice fella."
 George stacked the scattered cards and began to lay out his
solitaire hand. The shoes thudded on the ground outside. At the
windows the light of the evening still made the window squares
bright.
 "I ain't got no people," George said. "I seen the guys that go
around on the ranches alone. That ain't no good. They don't have
no fun. After a long time they get mean. They get wantin' to fight
all the time.
 "Yeah, they get mean," Slim agreed. "They get so they don't want
to talk to nobody."
 "'Course Lennie's a God damn nuisance most of the time," said
George. "But you get used to goin' around with a guy an' you can't
get rid of him."
 "He ain't mean," said Slim. "I can see Lennie ain't a bit mean."
 "'Course he ain't mean. But he gets in trouble alla time because
he's so God damn dumb. Like what happened in Weed-" he
stopped, stopped in the middle of turning over a card. He looked
alarmed and peered over at Slim. "You wouldn't tell nobody?"
 "What'd he do in Weed?" Slim asked calmly.
 "You wouldn' tell? . . . . No, 'course you wouldn'."
 "What'd he do in Weed?" Slim asked again.
 "Well, he seen this girl in a red dress. Dumb bastard like he is, he
wants to touch ever'thing he likes. Just wants to feel it. So he
reaches out to feel this red dress an' the girl lets out a squawk,
and that gets Lennie all mixed up, and he holds on 'cause that's
the only thing he can think to do. Well, this girl squawks and
squawks. I was jus' a little bit off, and I heard all the yellin', so I
comes running, an' by that time Lennie's so scared all he can
think to do is jus' hold on. I socked him over the head with a fence
picket to make him let go. He was so scairt he couldn't let go of
that dress. And he's so God damn strong, you know."
 Slim's eyes were level and unwinking. He nodded very slowly. "So
what happens?"
 George carefully built his line of solitaire cards. "Well, that girl
rabbits in an' tells the law she been raped. The guys in Weed start
a party out to lynch Lennie. So we sit in a irrigation ditch under
water all the rest of that day. Got on'y our heads sticking outa
water, an' up under the grass that sticks out from the side of the
ditch. An' that night we scrammed outa there."
 Slim sat in silence for a moment. "Didn't hurt the girl none, huh?"
he asked finally.
 "Hell, no. He just scared her. I'd be scared too if he grabbed me.
But he never hurt her. He jus' wanted to touch that red dress, like
he wants to pet them pups all the time."
 "He ain't mean," said Slim. "I can tell a mean guy a mile off."
 "'Course he ain't, and he'll do any damn thing I-"
 Lennie came in through the door. He wore his blue denim coat
over his shoulders like a cape, and he walked hunched way over.
 "Hi, Lennie," said George. "How you like the pup now?"
 Lennie said breathlessly, "He's brown an' white jus' like I
wanted." He went directly to his bunk and lay down and turned
his face to the wall and drew up his knees.
 George put down his cards very deliberately. "Lennie," he said
sharply.
 Lennie twisted his neck and looked over his shoulder. "Huh?
What you want, George?"
 "I tol' you you couldn't bring that pup in here."
 "What pup, George? I ain't got no pup."
 George went quickly to him, grabbed him by the shoulder and
rolled him over. He reached down and picked the tiny puppy from
where Lennie had been concealing it against his stomach.
 Lennie sat up quickly. "Give 'um to me, George."
 George said, "You get right up an' take this pup back to the nest.
He's gotta sleep with his mother. You want to kill him? Just born
last night an' you take him out of the nest. You take him back or
I'll tell Slim not to let you have him."
 Lennie held out his hands pleadingly. "Give 'um to me, George.
I'll take 'um back. I didn't mean no harm, George. Honest I didn't.
I jus' wanted to pet 'um a little."
 George handed the pup to him. "Awright. You get him back there
quick, and don't you take him out no more. You'll kill him, the
first thing you know." Lennie fairly scuttled out of the room.
 Slim had not moved. His calm eyes followed Lennie out the door.
"Jesus," he said. "He's jes' like kid, ain't he."
 "Sure he's jes' like a kid. There ain't no more harm in him than a
kid neither, except he's so strong. I bet he won't come in here to
sleep tonight. He'd sleep right alongside that box in the barn.
Well-let 'im. He ain't doin' no harm out there."
 It was almost dark outside now. Old Candy, the swamper, came
in and went to his bunk, and behind him struggled his old dog.
"Hello, Slim. Hello, George. Didn't neither of you play
horseshoes?"
 "I don't like to play ever' night," said Slim.
 Candy went on, "Either you guys got a slug of whisky? I gotta gut
ache."
 "I ain't," said Slim. "I'd drink it myself if I had, an' I ain't got a
gut ache neither."
 "Gotta bad gut ache," said Candy. "Them God! damn turnips give
it to me. I knowed they was going to before I ever eat 'em."
 The thick-bodied Carlson came in out of the darkening yard. He
walked to the other end of the bunk house and turned on the
second shaded light. "Darker'n hell in here," he said. "Jesus, how
that nigger can pitch shoes."
 "He's plenty good," said Slim.
 "Damn right he is," said Carlson. "He don't give nobody else a
chance to win-" He stopped and sniffed the air, and still sniffing,
looked down at the old dog. "God awmighty, that dog stinks. Get
him outa here, Candy! I don't know nothing that stinks as bad as
an old dog. You gotta get him out."
 Candy rolled to the edge of his bunk. He reached over and patted
the ancient dog, and he apologized, "I been around him so much I
never notice how he stinks."
 "Well, I can't stand him in here," said Carlson. "That stink hangs
around even after he's gone." He walked over with his heavylegged stride and looked down at the dog. "Got no teeth," he said.
"He's all stiff with rheumatism. He ain't no good to you, Candy.
An' he ain't no good to himself. Why'n't you shoot him, Candy?"
 The old man squirmed uncomfortably. "Well-hell! I had him so
long. Had him since he was a pup. I herded sheep with him." He
said proudly, "You wouldn't think it to look at him now, but he
was the best damn sheep dog I ever seen."
 George said, "I seen a guy in Weed that had an Airedale could
herd sheep. Learned it from the other dogs."
 Carlson was not to be put off. "Look, Candy. This of dog jus'
suffers hisself all the time. If you was to take him out and shoot
him right in the back of the head-" he leaned over and pointed, "-
right there, why he'd never know what hit him."
 Candy looked about unhappily. "No," he said softly. "No, I
couldn't do that. I had 'im too long."
 "He don't have no fun," Carlson insisted. "And he stinks to beat
hell. Tell you what. I'll shoot him for you. Then it won't be you
that does it."
 Candy threw his legs off his bunk. He scratched the white stubble
whiskers on his check nervously.

 "I'm so used to him," he said softly. "I had him from a pup."
 "Well, you ain't bein' kind to him keepin' him alive," said Carlson.
"Look, Slim's bitch got a litter right now. I bet Slim would give you
one of them pnps to raise up, wouldn't you, Slim?"
 The skinner had been studying the old dog with his calm eyes.
"Yeah," he said. "You can have a pup if you want to." He seemed to
shake himself free for speech. "Carl's right, Candy. That dog ain't
no good to himself. I wisht somebody'd shoot me if I get old an' a
cripple."
 Candy looked helplessly at him, for Slim's opinions were law.
"Maybe it'd hurt him," he suggested. "I don't mind takin' care of
him."
 Carlson said, "The way I'd shoot him, he wouldn't feel nothing. I'd
put the gun right there." He pointed with his toe. "Right back of
the head. He wouldn't even quiver."
 Candy looked for help from face to face. It was quite dark outside
by now. A young laboring man came in. His sloping shoulders
were bent forward and he walked heavily on his heels, as though
he carried the invisible grain bag. He went to his bunk and put his
hat on his shelf. Then he picked up a pulp magazine from his shelf
and brought it to the light over the table. "Did I show you this,
Slim?" he asked.
 "Show me what?"
 The young man turned to the back of the magazine, put it down
on the table and pointed with his finger. "Right there, read that."
Slim bent over it.

 "Go on," said the young man. "Read it out loud."
 "Dear Editor"': Slim read slowly. " 'I read your mag for six years
and I think it is the best on the market. I like stories by Peter
Rand. I think he is a whingding. Give us more like the Dark Rider.
I don't write many letters. Just thought I would tell you I think
your mag is the best dime's worth I ever spent.' "

 Slim looked up questioningly. "What you want me to read that
for?"
 Whit said, "Go on. Read the name at the bottom."
 Slim read, "'Yours for success, William Tenner.'" He glanced up at
Whit again. "What you want me to read that for?"
 Whit closed the magazine impressively. "Don't you remember Bill
Termer? Worked here about three months ago?"
 Slim thought . . . . "Little guy?" he asked. "Drove a cultivator?"
 "That's him," Whit cried. "That's the guy!"
 "You think he's the guy wrote this letter?"
 "I know it. Bill and me was in here one day. Bill had one of them
books that just come. He was lookin' in it and he says, 'I wrote a
letter. Wonder if they put it in the book!' But it wasn't there. Bill
says, `Maybe they're savin' it for later.' An' that's just what they
done. There it is."
 "Guess you're right," said Slim. "Got it right in the book."
 George held out his hand for the magazine. "Let's look at it?"
 Whit found the place again, but he did not surrender his hold on
it. He pointed out the letter with his forefinger. And then he went
to his box shelf and laid the magazine carefully in. "I wonder if
Bill seen it," he said. "Bill and me worked in that patch of field
peas. Run cultivators, both of us. Bill was a hell of a nice fella."
 During the conversation Carlson had refused to be drawn in. He
continued to look down at the old dog. Candy watched him
uneasily. At last Carlson said, "if you want me to, I'll put the old
devil out of his misery right now and get it over with. Ain't
nothing left for him. Can't eat, can't see, can't even walk without
hurtin'."
 Candy said hopefully, "You ain't got no gun."
 "The hell I ain't. Got a Luger. It won't hurt him none at all."
 Candy said, "Maybe tomorra. Le's wait till tomorra."
 "I don't see no reason for it," said Carlson. He went to his bunk,
pulled his bag from underneath it and took out a Luger pistol.
"Le's get it over with," he said. "We can't sleep with him stinkin'
around in here." He put the pistol in his hip pocket.
 Candy looked a long time at Slim to try to find some reversal. And
Slim gave him none. At last Candy said softly and hopelessly,
"Awright--take 'im." He did not look down at the dog at all. He lay
back on his bunk and crossed his arms behind his head and stared
at the ceiling.
 From his pocket Carlson took a little leather thong. He stooped
over and tied it around the old dog's neck. All the men except
Candy watched him.
 "Come boy. Come on, boy," he said gently. And he said
apologetically to Candy, "He won't even feel it." Candy did not
move nor answer him. He twitched the thong. "Come on, boy." The
old dog got slowly and stiffly to his feet and followed the gently
pulling leash.
 Slim said, "Carlson."
 "Yeah?"
 "You know what to do."
 "What ya mean, Slim?"
 "Take a shovel," said Slim shortly.
 "Oh, sure! I get you." He led the dog out into the darkness.
 George followed to the door and shut the door and set the latch
gently in its place. Candy lay rigidly on his bed staring at the
ceiling.
 Slim said loudly, "One of my lead mules got a bad hoof. Got to get
some tar on it." His voice trailed off. It was silent outside.
Carlson's footsteps died away. The silence come into the room.
And the silence lasted.
 George chuckled, "I bet Lennie's right out there in the barn with
his pup. He won't want to come in here no more now he's got a
pup."
 Slim said, "Candy, you can have any one of them pups you want."
 Candy did not answer. The silence fell on the room again. It came
out of the night and invaded the room. George said, "Anybody like
to play a little euchre?"
 "I'll play out a few with you," said Whit.
 They took places opposite each other at the table under the light,
but George did not shuffle the cards. He rippled the edge of the
deck nervously, and the little snapping noise drew.the eyes of all
the men in the room, so that he stopped doing it. The silence fell
on the room again. A minute passed, and another minute. Candy
lay still, staring at the ceiling. Slim gazed at him for a moment
and then looked down at his hands; he subdued one hand with the
other, and held it down. There came a little gnawing sound from
under the floor and all the men looked down toward it gratefully.
Only Candy continued to stare at the ceiling.
 "Sounds like there was a rat under there," said Geoge. "We ought
to get a trap down there."
 Whit broke out, "What the hell's takin' him so long? Lay out some
cards, why don't you? We ain't going to get no euchre played this
way."
 George brought the cards together tightly and studied the backs
of them. The silence was in the room again.
 A shot sounded in the distance. The men looked quickly at the old
man. Every head turned toward him.
 For a moment he continued to stare at the ceiling. Then he rolled
slowly over and faced the wall and lay silent.
 George shuffled the cards noisily and dealt them. Whit drew a
scoring board to him and set the pegs to start. Whit said, "I guess
you guys really come here to work."
 "How do ya mean?" George asked.
 Whit laughed. "Well, ya come on a Friday. You got two days to
work till Sunday."
 "I don't see how you figure," said George.
 Whit laughed again. "You do if you been around these big ranches
much. Guy that wants to look over a ranch comes in Sat'day
afternoon. He gets Sat'day tight supper an' three meals on
Sunday, and he can quit Monday mornin' after breakfast without
turning his hand. But you come to work Friday noon. You got to
put in a day an' a half no matter how you figure.
 George looked at him levelly. "We're gonna stick aroun' a while,"
he said. "Me an' Lennie's gonna roll up a stake."
 The door opened quietly and the stable buck put in his head; a
lean Negro head, lined with pain, the eyes patient. "Mr. Slim."
 Slim took his eyes from old Candy. "Huh? Oh! Hello, Crooks.
What's'a matter?"
 "You told me to warm up tar for that mule's foot. I got it warm."
 "Oh! Sure, Crooks. I'll come right out an' put it on."
 "I can do it if you want, Mr. Slim."
 "No. I'll come do it myself." He stood up.
 Crooks said, "Mr. Slim."
 "Yeah."
 "That big new guy's messin' around your pups out in the barn."
 "Well, he ain't doin' no harm. I give him one of them pups."
 "Just thought I'd tell ya," said Crooks. "He's takin' 'em outs the
nest and handlin' them. That won't do them no good."
 "He won't hurt 'em," said Slim. "I'll come along with you now."
 George looked up. "If that crazy bastard's foolin' around too much,
jus' kick him out, Slim."
 Slim followed the stable buck out of the room.
 George dealt and Whit picked up his cards and examined them.
"Seen the new kid yet?" he asked.
 "What kid?" George asked.
 "Why, Curley's new wife."
 "Yeah, I seen her."
 "Well, ain't she a looloo?"
 "I ain't seen that much of her," said George.
 Whit laid down his cards impressively. " Well, stick around an'
keep your eyes open. You'll see plenty. She ain't concealin'
nothing. I never seen nobody like her. She got the eye goin' all the
time on everybody. I bet she even gives the stable buck the eye. I
don't know what the hell she wants."
 George asked casually, "Been any trouble since she got here?"
 It was obvious that Whit was not interested in his cards. He laid
his hand down and George scooped it in. George laid out his
deliberate solitaire handseven cards, and six on top, and five on
top of those.
 Whit said, "I see what you mean. No, they ain't been nothing yet.
Curley's got yella-jackets in his drawers, but that's all so far. Ever'
time the guys is around she shows up. She's lookin' for Curley, or
she thought she lef' sotnethin' layin' around and she's lookin' for
it. Seems like she can't keep away from guys. An' Curley's pants is
just crawlin' with ants, but they ain't nothing come of it yet."
 George said, "She's gonna make a mess. They's gonna be a bad
mess about her. She's a jail bait all set on the trigger. That Curley
got his work cut out for him. Ranch with a bunch of guys on it
ain't no place for a girl, specially like her."
 Whit said, "If you got idears, you ought to come in town with us
guys tomorra night."
 "Why? What's doin'?"
 "Jus' the usual thing. We go in to old Susy's place. Hell of a nice
place. Old Susy's a laugh always crackin' jokes. Like she says
when we come up on the front porch las' Sat'day night. Susy opens
the door and then she yells over her shoulder, 'Get yor coats on,
girls, here comes the sheriff.' She never talks dirty, neither. Got
five girls there."
 "What's it set you back?" George asked.
 "Two an' a half. You can get a shot for two hits. Susy got nice
chairs to set in, too. If a guy don't want a flop, why he can just set
in the chairs and have a couple or three shots and pass the time of
day and Susy don't give a damn. She ain't rushin' guys through
and kickin' 'em out if they don't want a flop."
 "Might go in and look the joint over," said George.
 "Sure. Come along. It's a hell of a lot of fun-her crackin' jokes all
the time. Like she says one time, she says, 'I've knew people that
if they got a rag rug on the floor an' a kewpie doll lamp on the
phonograph they think they're running a parlor house.'

 That's Clara's house she's talkin' about. An' Susy says, 'I know
what you boys want; she says. 'My girls is clean,' she says, 'an'
there ain't no water in my whisky,' she says. 'If any you guys
wanta look at a kewpie doll lamp an' take your own chance gettin'
burned, why you know where to go.' An' she says, 'There's guys
around here walkin' bow-legged 'cause they like to look at a
kewpie doll lamp."'
 George asked, "Clara runs the other house, huh?"
 "Yeah," said Whit. "We don't never go there. Clara gets three
bucks a crack and thirty-five cents a shot, and she don't crack no
jokes. But Susy's place is clean and she got nice chairs. Don't let
no googoos in, neither."
 "Me an' Lennie's rollin' up a stake," said George. "I might go in
an' set and have a shot, but I ain't puffin' out no two and a half."
 "Well, a guy got to have some fun sometime," said Whit.
 The door opened and Lennie and Carlson came in together.
Lennie crept to his bunk and sat down, trying not to attract
attention. Carlson reached under his bunk and brought out his
bag. He didn't look at old Candy, who still faced the wall. Carlson
found a little cleaning rod in the bag and a can of oil. He laid them
on his bed and then brought out the pistol, took out the magazine
and snapped the loaded shell from the chamber. Then he fell to
cleaning the barrel with the little rod. When the ejector snapped,
Candy turned over and looked for a moment at the gun before he
turned back to the wall again.
 Carlson said casually, "Curley been in yet?"

 "No," said Whit. "What's eatin' on Curley?"
 Carlson squinted down the barrel of his gun. "Lookin' for his old
lady. I seen him going round and round outside."
 Whit said sarcastically, "He spends half his time lookin' for her,
and the rest of the time she's lookin' for him."
 Curley burst into the room excitedly. "Any you guys seen my
wife?" he demanded.
 "She ain't been here," said Whit.
 Curley looked threateningly about the room. "Where the hell's
Slim?"
 "Went out in the barn," said George. "He was gonna put some tar
on a split hoof."
 Curley's shoulders dropped and squared. "How long ago'd he go?"
 "Five-ten minutes."
 Curley jumped out the door and banged it after him.
 Whit stood up. "I guess maybe I'd like to see this," he said.
"Curley's just spoilin' or he wouldn't start for Slim. An' Curley's
handy, God damn handy. Got in the finals for the Golden Gloves.
He got newspaper clippings about it." He considered. "But jus' the
same, he better leave Slim alone. Nobody don't know what Slim
can do."
 "Thinks Slim's with his wife, don't he?" said George.
 "Looks like it," Whit said. "'Course Slim ain't. Least I don't think
Slim is. But I like to see the fuss if it comes off. Come on, le's go."
 George said, "I'm stayin' right here. I don't want to get mixed up
in nothing. Lennie and me got to make a stake."
 Carlson finished the cleaning of the gun and put it in the bag and
pushed the bag under his bunk. "I guess I'll go out and look her
over," he said. Old Candy lay still, and Lennie, from his bunk,
watched George cautiously.
 When Whit and Carlson were gone and the door closed after
them, George turned to Lennie. "What you got on your mind?"
 "I ain't done nothing, George. Slim says I better not pet them
pups so much for a while. Slim says it ain't good for them; so I
come right in. I been good, George."
 "I coulda told you that," said George.
 "Well, I wasn't hurtin' 'em none. I jus' had mine in my lap pettin'
it."
 George asked, "Did you see Slim out in the barn?"
 "Sure I did. He tol' me I better not pet that pup no more."
 "Did you see that girl?"
 "You mean Curley's girl?"
 "Yeah. Did she come in the barn?"
 "No. Anyways I never seen her."
 "You never seen Slim talkin' to her?"
 "Uh-uh. She ain't been in the barn."
 "O.K.," said George. "I guess them guys ain't gonna see no fight. If
there's any fightin', Lennie, you keep out of it."
 "I don't want no fights," said Lennie. He got up from his bunk and
sat down at the table, across from George. Almost automatically
George shuffled the cards and laid out his solitaire hand. He used
a deliberate, thoughtful, slowness.
 Lennie reached for a face card and studied it, then turned it
upside down and studied it. "Both ends the same," he said.
"George, why is it both end's the same?"
 "I don't know," said George. "That's jus' the way they make 'em.
What was Slim doin' in the barn when you seen him?"
 "Slim?"
 "Sure. You seen him in the barn, an' he tol' you not to pet the
pups so much."
 "Oh, yeah. He had a can a' tar an' a paint brush. I don't know
what for."
 "You sure that girl didn't come in like she come in here today?"
 "No. She never come."
 George sighed. "You give me a good whore house every time," he
said. "A guy can go in an' get drunk and get ever'thing outa his
system all at once, an' no messes. And he knows how much it's
gonna set him back. These here jail baits is just set on the trigger
of the hoosegow."
 Lennie followed his words admiringly, and moved his lips a little
to keep up. George continued, "You remember Andy Cushman,
Lennie? Went to grammar school?"
 "The one that his old lady used to make hot cakes for the kids?"
Lennie asked.
 "Yeah. That's the one. You can remember anything if there's
anything to eat in it." George looked carefully at the solitaire
hand. He put an ace up on his scoring rack and piled a two, three
and four of diamonds on it. "Andy's in San Quentin right now on
account of a tart," said George.
 Lennie drummed on the table with his fingers. "George?"
 "Huh?"
 "George, how long's it gonna be till we get that little place an' live
on the fatta the lan-an' rabbits?"
 "I don' know," said George. "We gotta get a big stake together. I
know a little place we can get cheap, but they ain't givin' it away."
 Old Candy turned slowly over. His eyes were wide open. He
watched George carefully.
 Lennie said, "Tell about that place, George."
 "I jus' tol' you, jus' las' night."
 "Go on-tell again, George."
 "Well, it's ten acres," said George. "Got a little win'mill. Got a
little shack on it, an' a chicken run. Got a kitchen, orchard,
cherries, apples, peaches, 'cots, nuts, got a few berries. They's a
place for alfalfa and plenty water to flood it. They's a pig pen-'
 "An' rabbits, George."
 "No place for rabbits now, but I could easy build a few hutches
and you could feed alfalfa to the rabbits."
 "Damn right, I could," said Lennie. "You God damn right I could."
 George's hands stopped working with the cards. His voice was
growing warmer. "An' we could have a few pigs. I could build a
smoke house like the one gran'pa had, an' when we kill a pig we
can smoke the bacon and the hams, and make sausage an' all like
that. An' when the salmon run up river we could catch a hundred
of 'em an' salt 'em down or smoke 'em. We could have them for
breakfast. They ain't nothing so nice as smoked salmon. When the
fruit come in we could can it-and tomatoes, they're easy to can.
Ever' Sunday we'd kill a chicken or a rabbit. Maybe we'd have a
cow or a goat, and the cream is so God damn thick you got to cut it
with a knife and take it out with a spoon."
 Lennie watched him with wide eyes, and old Candy watched him
too. Lennie said softly, "We could live offa the fatta the lan'."
 "Sure," said George. "All kin's a vegetables in the garden, and if
we want a little whisky we can sell a few eggs or something, or
some milk. We'd jus' live there. We'd belong there. There wouldn't
be no more runnin' round the country and gettin' fed by a Jap
cook. No, sir, we'd have our own place where we belonged and not
sleep in no bunt house."
 "Tell about the house, George," Lennie begged.
 "Sure, we'd have a little house an' a room to ourself. Little fat iron
stove, an' in the winter we'd keep a fire goin' in it. It ain't enough
land so we'd have to work too hard. Maybe six, seven hours a day.
We wouldn't have to buck no barley eleven hours a day. An' when
we put in a crop, why, we'd be there to take the crop up. We'd
know what come of our planting."
 "An' rabbits," Lennie said eagerly. "An' I'd take care of 'em. Tell
how I'd do that, George."
 "Sure, you'd go out in the alfalfa patch an' you'd have a sack.
You'd fill up the sack and bring it in an' put it in the rabbit cages."
 "They'd nibble an' they'd nibble," said Lennie, "the way they do. I
seen'em."
 "Ever' six weeks or so," George continued, "them does would
throw a litter so we'd have plenty rabbits to eat an' to sell. An'
we'd keep a few pigeons to go flyin' around the win'mill like they
done when I was a kid." He looked raptly at the wall over Lennie's
head. "An' it'd be our own, an 'nobody could can us. If we don't like
a guy we can say, 'Get the hell out,' and by God he's got to do it.
An' if a fren' come along, why we'd have an extra bunk, an' we'd
say, 'Why don't you spen' the night?' an' by God he would. We'd
have a setter dog and a couple stripe cats, but you gotta watch out
them cats don't get the little rabbits."
 Lennie breathed hard. "You jus' let 'em try to get the rabbits. I'll
break their God damn necks. I'll . . . . I'll smash 'em with a stick."
He subsided, grumbling to himself, threatening the future cats
which might dare to disturb the future rabbits.
 George sat entranced with his own picture.
 When Candy spoke they both jumped as though they had been
caught doing something reprehensible. Candy said, "You know
where's a place like that?"
 George was on guard immediately. "S'pose I do," he said. "What's
that to you?"
 "You don't need to tell me where it's at. Might be any place."

 "Sure," said George. "That's right. You couldn't find it in a
hundred years."
 Candy went on excitedly, "How much they want for a place like
that?"
 George watched him suspiciously. "Well-I could get it for six
hundred bucks. The ol' people that owns it is flat bust an' the of
lady needs an operation. Say-what's it to you? You got nothing to
do with us."
 Candy said, "I ain't much good with on'y one hand. I lost my hand
right here on this ranch. That's why they give me a job swampin'.
An' they give me two hundred an' fifty dollars 'cause I los' my
hand An' I got fifty more saved up right in the bank, right now.
Tha's three hunderd, and I got fifty more comin' the end a the
month. Tell you what-" He leaned forward eagerly. "S'pose I went
in with you guys. Tha's three hunderd an' fifty bucks I'd put in. I
ain't much good, but I could cook and tend the chickens and hoe
the garden some. How'd that be?"
 George half-closed his eyes. "I gotta think about that. We was
always gonna do it by ourselves."
 Candy interrupted him, "I'd make a will an' leave my share to you
guys in case I kick off, 'cause I ain't got no relatives nor nothing.
You guys got any money? Maybe we could do her right now?"
 George spat on the floor disgustedly. "We got ten bucks between
us." Then he said thoughtfully, "Look, if me an' Lennie work a
month an' don't spen' nothing, we'll have a hunderd bucks. That'd
be four fifty. I bet we could swing her for that. Then you an'
Lennie could go get her started an' I'd get a job an' make up the
res', an' you could sell eggs an' stuff like that."
 They fell into a silence. They looked at one another, amazed. This
thing they had never really believed in was coming true. George
said reverently, "Jesus Christ! I bet we could swing her." His eyes
were full of wonder. "I bet we could swing her," he repeated softly.
 Candy sat on the edge of his bunk. He scratched the stump of his
wrist nervously. "I got hurt four year ago," he said. "They'll can me
purty soon. Jus' as soon as I can't swamp out no bunk houses
they'll put me on the county. Maybe if I give you guys my money,
you'll let me hoe in the garden even after I ain't no good at it. An'
I'll wash dishes an' little chicken stuff like that. But I'll be on our
own place, an' I'll be let to work on our own place." He said
miserably, "You seen what they done to my dog tonight? They says
he wasn't no good to himself nor nobody else. When they can me
here I wisht somebody'd shoot me. But they won't do nothing like
that. I won't have no place to go, an' I can't get no more jobs. I'll
have thirty dollars more comin', time you guys is ready to quit."
 George stood up. "We'll do her," he said. "We'll fix up that little
old place an' we'll go live there." He sat down again. They all sat
still, all bemused by the beauty of the thing, each mind was
popped into the future when this lovely thing should come about.
 George said wonderingly, "S'pose they was a carnival or a circus
come to town, or a ball game, or any damn thing." Old Candy
nodded in appreciation of the idea. "We'd just go to her," George
said. "We wouldn't ask nobody if we could. Jus' say, 'We'll go to
her,' an' we would. Jus' milk the cow and sling some grain to the
chickens an' go to her."
 "An' put some grass to the rabbits," Lennie broke in. "I wouldn't
never forget to feed them. When we gon'ta do it, George?"
 "In one month. Right squack in one month. Know what I'm gon'ta
do? I'm gon'ta write to them old people that owns the place that
we'll take it. An' Candy'll send a hunderd dollars to bind her."
 "Sure will," said Candy. "They got a good stove there?"
 "Sure, got a nice stove, burns coal or wood."
 "I'm gonna take my pup," said Lennie. "I bet by Christ he likes it
there, by Jesus."
 Voices were approaching from outside. George said quickly,
"Don't tell nobody about it. Jus' us three an' nobody else. They
li'ble to can us so we can't make no stake. Jus' go on like we was
gonna buck barley the rest of our lives, then all of a sudden some
day we'll go get our pay an' scram outa here."
 Lennie and Candy nodded, and they were grinning with delight.
"Don't tell nobody," Lennie said to himself.
 Candy said, "George."
 "Huh?"
 "I ought to of shot that dog myself, George. I shouldn't ought to of
let no stranger shoot my dog."
 The door opened. Slim came in, followed by Curley and Carlson
and Whit. Slim's hands were black with tar and he was scowling.
Curley hung close to his elbow.
 Curley said, "Well, I didn't mean nothing, Slim. I just ast you."
 Slim said, "Well, you been askin' me too often. I'm gettin' God
damn sick of it. If you can't look after your own God damn wife,
what you expect me to do about it? You lay offa me."
 "I'm jus' tryin' to tell you I didn't mean nothing," said Curley. "I
jus' thought you might of saw her."
 "Why'n't you tell her to stay the hell home where she belongs?"
said Carlson. "You let her hang around bunk houses and pretty
soon you're gonna have som'pin on your hands and you won't be
able to do nothing about it."
 Curley whirled on Carlson. "You keep outta this les' you wanta
step outside."
 Carlson laughed. "You God damn punk," he said. "You tried to
throw a scare into Slim, an' you couldn't make it stick. Slim
throwed a scare inta you. You're yella as a frog belly. I don't care if
you're the best welter in the country. You come for me, an' I'll kick
your God damn head off."
 Candy joined the attack with joy. "Glove fulla vaseline," he said
disgustedly. Curley glared at him. His eyes slipped on past and
lighted on Lennie; and Lennie was still smiling with delight at the
memory of the ranch.
 Curley stepped over to Lennie like a terrier. "What the hell you
laughin' at?"
 Lennie looked blankly at him. "Huh?"
 Then Curley's rage exploded. "Come on, ya big bastard. Get up on
your feet. No big son-of-a-bitch is gonna laugh at me. I'll show ya
who's yella."
 Lennie looked helplessly at George, and then he got up and tried
to retreat. Curley was balanced and poised. He slashed at Lennie
with his left, and then smashed down his nose with a right.
Lennie gave a cry of terror. Blood welled from his nose. "George,"
he cried. "Make 'um let me alone, George." He backed until he was
against the wall, and Curley followed, slugging him in the face.
Lennie's hands remained at his sides; he was too frightened to
defend himself.
 George was on his feet yelling, "Get him, Lennie. Don't let him do
it."
 Lennie covered his face with his huge paws and bleated with
terror. He cried, "Make 'um stop, George." Then Curley attacked
his stomach and cut off his wind.
 Slim jumped up. "The dirty little rat," he cried, "I'll get 'um
myself."
 George put out his hand and grabbed Slim. "Wait a minute," he
shouted. He cupped his hands around his mouth and yelled, "Get
'em, Lennie! "
 Lennie took his hands away from his face and looked about for
George, and Curley slashed at his eyes. The big face was covered
with blood. George yelled again, "I said get him."
 Curley's fist was swinging when Lennie reached for it. The next
minute Curley was flopping like a fish on a line, and his closed fist
was lost in Lennie's big hand. George ran down the room. "Leggo
of him, Lennie. Let go."

 But Lennie watched in terror the flopping little man whom he
held. Blood ran down Lennie's face; one of his eyes was cut and
closed. George slapped him in the face again and again, and still
Lennie held on to the closed fist. Curley was white and shrunken;
by now, and his struggling had become weak. He stood crying, his
fist lost in Lennie's paw.
 George shouted over and over, "Leggo his hand, Lennie. Leggo.
Slim, come help me while the guy got any hand left."
 Suddenly Lennie let go his hold. He crouch cowering against the
wall. "You tol' me to, George," he said miserably.
 Curley sat down on the floor, looking in wonder at his crushed
hand. Slim and Carlson bent over him. Then Slim straightened up
and regarded Lennie with horror. "We got to get him in to a
doctor," he said. "Looks to me like ever' bone in his han' is bust."
 "I didn't wanta," Lennie cried. "I didn't wanta hurt him."
 Slim said, "Carlson, you get the candy wagon hitched up. We'll
take 'um into Soledad an' get 'um fixed up." Carlson hurried out.
Slim turned to the whimpering Lennie. "It ain't your fault," he sai
"This punk sure had it comin' to him. But-Jesus! He ain't hardly
got no han' left." Slim hurried out, and in a moment returned with
a tin cup of water. He held it to Curley's lips.
 George said, "Slim, will we get canned now? We need the stake.
Will Curley's old man can us now?"
 Slim smiled wryly. He knelt down beside Curley. "You got your
senses in hand enough to listen?" he asked. Curley nodded. "Well,
then listen," Slim went on. "I think you got your han' caught in a
machine. If you don't tell nobody what happened, we ain't going to.
But you jus' tell an' try to get this guy canned and we'll tell
ever'body, an' then will you get' the laugh."
 "I won't tell," said Curley. He avoided looking at Lennie.
 Buggy wheels sounded outside. Slim helped Curley up. "Come on
now. Carlson's gonna take you to a doctor." He helped Curley out
the door. The sound of wheels drew away. In a moment Slim came
back into the bunk house. He looked at Lennie, still crouched
fearfully against the wall. "Le's see your hands," he asked.
 Lennie stuck out his hands.
 "Christ awmighty, I hate to have you mad at me," Slim said.
 George broke in, "Lennie was jus' scairt," he explained. "He didn't
know what to do. I told you nobody ought never to fight him. No, I
guess it was Candy I told."
 Candy nodded solemnly. "That's jus' what you done," he said.
"Right this morning when Curley first lit into your fren', you says,
'He better not fool with Lennie if he knows what's good for 'um.'
That's jus' what you says to me."
 George turned to Lennie. "It ain't your fault," he said. "You don't
need to be scairt no more. You done jus' what I tol' you to. Maybe
you better go in the ' wash room an' clean up your face. You look
like' hell."
 Lennie smiled with his bruised mouth. "I didn't want no trouble,"
he said. He walked toward the door, but just before he came to it,
he turned back. "George?"
 "What you want?"
 "I can still tend the rabbits, George?"
 "Sure. You ain't done nothing wrong."
 "I di'n't mean no harm, George."
 "Well, get the hell out and wash your face."
 CROOKS, the Negro stable buck, had his bunk in the harness
room; a little shed that leaned off the wall of the barn. On one side
of the little room there was a square four-paned window, and on
the other, a narrow plank door leading into the barn. Crooks' bunk
was a long box filled with straw, on which his blankets were flung.
On the wall by the window there were pegs on which hung broken
harness in process of being mended; strips of new leather; and
under the window itself a little bench for leatherworking tools,
curved knives and needles and balls of linen thread, and a small
hand riveter. On pegs were also pieces of harness, a split collar
with the horsehairstuffing sticking out, a broken hame, and a
trace chain with its leather covering split. Crooks had his apple
box over his bunk, and in it a range of medicine bottles, both for
himself and for the horses. There were cans of saddle soap and a
drippy can of tar with its paint brush sticking over the edge. And
scattered about the floor were a number of personal possessions;
for, being alone, Crooks could leave his things about, and being a
stable buck and a cripple, he was more permanent than the other
men, and he had accumulated more possessions than he could
carry on his back.
 Crooks possessed several pairs of shoes, a pair of rubber boots, a
big alarm clock and a single-barreled shotgun. And he had books,
too; a tattered dictionary and a mauled copy of the California civil
code for 1905. There were battered magazines and a few dirty
books on a special shelf over his bunk. A pair of large gold-rimmed
spectacles hung from a nail on the wall above his bed.
 This room was swept and fairly neat, for Crooks was a proud,
aloof man. He kept his distance and demanded that other people
keep theirs. His body was bent over to the left by his crooked
spine, and his eyes lay deep in his head, and because of their
depth seemed to glitter with intensity. His lean face was lined
with deep black wrinkles, and he had thin, pain-tightened lips
which were lighter than his face.
 It was Saturday night. Through the open door that led into the
barn came the sound of moving horses, of feet stirring, of teeth
champing on hay, of the rattle of halter chains. In the stable
buck's room a small electric globe threw a meager yellow light.
 Crooks sat on his bunk. His shirt was out of his jeans in back. In
one hand he held a bottle of liniment, and with the other he
rubbed his spine. Now and then he poured a few drops of the
liniment into his pink-palmed hand and reached up under his
shirt to rub again. He flexed his muscles against his back and
shivered.
 Noiselessly Lennie appeared in the open doorway and stood there
looking in, his big shoulders nearly filling the opening. For a
moment Crooks did not see him, but on raising his eyes he
stiffened and a scowl came on his face. His hand came out from
under his shirt.
 Lennie smiled helplessly in an attempt to make friends.
 Crooks said sharply, "You got no right to come in my room. This
here's my room. Nobody got any right in here but me."
 Lennie gulped and his smile grew more fawning. "I ain't doing
nothing," he said. "Just come to look at my puppy. And I seen your
light," he explained.
 "Well, I got a right to have a light. You go on get outta my room. I
ain't wanted in the bunk house, and you ain't wanted in my room."
 "Why ain't you wanted?" Lennie asked.
 "'Cause I'm black. They play cards in there, but I can't play
because I'm black. They say I stink. Well, I tell you, you all of you
stink to me."
 Lennie flapped his big hands helplessly. "Ever'body went into
town," he said. "Slim an' George an' ever'body. George says I gotta
stay here an' not get in no trouble. I seen your light."
 "Well, what do you want?"
 "Nothing-I seen your light. I thought I could jus' come in an' set."
 Crooks stared at Lennie, and he reached behind him and took
down the spectacles and adjusted them over his pink ears and
stared again. "I don't know what you're doin' in the barn anyway,"
he complained. "You ain't no skinner. They's no call for a bucker to
come into the barn at all. You ain't no skinner. You ain't got
nothing to do with the horses."
 "The pup," Lennie repeated "I come to see my pup."
 "Well, go see your pup, then. Don't come in a place where you're
not wanted."
 Lennie lost his smile. He advanced a step into the room, then
remembered and backed to the door again. "I looked at 'em a little.
Slim says I ain't to pet 'em very much."
 Crooks said, "Well, you been takin' 'em out of the nest all the
time. I wonder the old lady don't move 'em someplace else."
 "Oh, she don't care. She lets me." Lennie had moved into the room
again.
 Crooks scowled, but Lennie's disarming smile defeated him.
"Come on in and set a while," Crooks said. "'Long as you won't get
out and leave me alone, you might as well set down." His tone was
a little more friendly. "All the boys gone into town, huh?"
 "All but old Candy. He just sets in the bunk house sharpening his
pencil and sharpening and figuring."
 Crooks adjusted his glasses. "Figuring? What's Candy figuring
about?"
 Lennie almost shouted, "'Bout the rabbits."
 "You're nuts," said Crooks. "You're crazy as a wedge. What
rabbits you talkin' about?"
 "The rabbits we're gonna get, and I get to tend 'em, cut grass an'
give 'em water, an' like that."
 "Jus' nuts," said Crooks. "I don't blame the guy you travel with for
keepin' you outa sight."
 Lennie said quietly, "It ain't no lie. We're gonna do it. Gonna get a
little place an' live on the fatta the lan'."
 Crooks settled himself more comfortably on his bunk. "Set down,"
he invited. "Set down on the nail keg."
 Lennie hunched down on the little barrel. "You think it's a lie,"
Lennie said, "But it ain't no lie. Ever' word's the truth, an' you can
ast George."
 Crooks put his dark chin into his pink palm. "You travel aroun'
with George, don't ya?"
 "Sure. Me an' him goes ever' place together."
 Crooks continued. "Sometimes he talks, and you don't know what
the hell he's talkin' about. Ain't that so?" He leaned forward,
boring Lennie with his deep eyes. "Ain't that so?"
 "Yeah . . . . sometimes."
 "Jus' talks on, an' you don't know what the hell it's all about?"
 "Yeah . . . . sometimes. But . . . . not always."
 Crooks leaned forward over the edge of the bunk. "I ain't a
Southern Negro," he said." I was born right bere in California. My
old man had a chicken ranch, 'bout ten acres. The white kids come
to play at our place, an' sometimes I event to play with them, and
some of them was pretty nice. My of man didn't like that. I never
knew till long later why he didn't like that. But I know now." He
hesitated, and when he spoke again his voice was softer. "There
wasn't another colored family for miles around. And now there
ain't a colored man on this ranch an' there's jus' one family in
Soledad." He laughed. "If I say something, why it's just a nigger
sayin' it"
 Lennie asked, "How long you think it'll be before them pups will
be old enough to pet?"
 Crooks laughed again. "A guy can talk to you an' be sure you
won't go blabbin'. Couple of weeks an' them pups'll be all right.
George knows what he's about. Jus' talks, an' you don't
understand nothing." He leaned forward excitedly. "This is just a
nigger talkin', an' a busted-back nigger. So it don't mean nothing,
see? You couldn't remember it anyways. I seen it over an' over-a
guy talkin' to another guy and it don't make no difference if he
don't hear or understand. The thing is, they're talkin', or they're
settin' still not talkin'. It don't make no difference, no difference."
His excitement had increased until he pounded his knee with his
hand. "George can tell you screwy things, and it don't matter. It's
just the talking. It's just bein' with another guy. That's all." He
paused.
 His voice grew soft and persuasive. "S'pose George don't come
back no more. S'pose he took a powder and just ain't coming back.
What'll you do then?"
 Lennie's attention came gradually to what had been said. "What?"
he demanded.
 "I said s'pose George went into town tonight and you never heard
of him no more." Crooks pressed forward some kind of private
victory. "Just s'pose that," he repeated.
 "He won't do it," Lennie cried. "George wouldn't do nothing like
that. I been with George a long time. He'll come back tonight-" But
the doubt was too much for him. "Don't you think he will?"
 Crooks' face lighted with pleasure in his torture.
 "Nobody can't tell what a guy'll do," he observed calmly. "Le's say
he wants to come back and can't. S'pose he gets killed or hurt so
he can't come back."
 Lennie struggled to understand. "George won't do nothing like
that," he repeated.."George is careful. He won't get hurt. He ain't
never been hurt, 'cause he's careful."
 "Well, s'pose, jus' s'pose he don't come back. What'll you do then?"
 Lennie's face wrinkled with apprehension. "I don' know. Say,
what you doin' anyways?" he cried. "This ain't true. George ain't
got hurt."
 Crooks bored in on him. "Want me to tell ya what'll happen?
They'll take ya to the booby hatch. They'll tie ya up with a collar,
like a dog."
 Suddenly Lennie's eyes. centered and grew quiet, and mad. He
stood up and walked dangerously toward Crooks. "Who hurt
George?" he demanded.
 Crooks saw the danger as it approached him. He edged back on
his bunk to get out of the way. "I was just supposin'," he said.
"George ain't hurt. He's all right. He'll be back all right."
 Lennie stood over him. "What you supposin' for? Ain't nobody
goin' to suppose no hurt to George."
 Crooks removed his glasses and wiped his eyes with his fingers.
"Jus' set down," he said. "George ain't hurt."
 Lennie growled back to his seat on the nail keg. "Ain't nobody
goin' to talk no hurt to George," he grumbled.
 Crooks said gently, "Maybe you can see now. You got George.
Youknow he's goin' to come back. S'pose you didn't have nobody.
S'pose you couldn't go into the bunk house and play rummy 'cause
you was black. How'd you like that? S'pose you had to sit out here
an' read books. Sure you could play horseshoes till it got dark, but
then you got to read books. Books ain't no good. A guy needs
somebody -to be near him." He whined, "A guy goes nuts if he ain't
got nobody. Don't make no difference who the guy is, long's he's
with you. I tell ya," he cried, "I tell ya a guy gets too lonely an' he
gets sick."
 "George gonna come back," Lennie reassured himself in a
frightened voice. "Maybe George come back already. Maybe I
better go see."
 Crooks said, "I didn't mean to scare you. He'll come back. I was
talkin' about myself. A guy sets alone out here at night, maybe
readin' books or thinkin' or stuff like that. Sometimes he gets
thinkin', an' he got nothing to tell him what's so an' what ain't so.
Maybe if he sees somethin', he don't know whether it's right or
not. He can't turn to some other guy and ast him if he sees it too.
He can't tell. He got nothing to measure by. I seen things out here.
I wasn't drunk. I don't know if I was asleep. If some guy was with
me, he could tell me I was asleep, an' then it would be all right.
But I jus' don't know." Crooks was looking across the room now,
looking toward the window.
 Lennie said miserably, "George won't go away and leave me. I
know George wun't do that."
 The stable buck went on dreamily, "I remember when I was a
little kid on my old man's chicken ranch. Had two brothers. They
was always near me, always there. Used to sleep right in the same
room, right in the same bed-all three. Had a strawberry patch.
Had an alfalfa patch. Used to turn the chickens out in the alfalfa
on a sunny morning. My brothers'd set on a fence rail an' watch
'em-white chickens they was."
 Gradually Lennie's interest came around to what was being said.
"George says we're gonna have alfalfa for the rabbits."
 "What rabbits?"
 "We're gonna have rabbits an' a berry patch."
 "You're nuts."
 "We are too. You ast George."
 "You're nuts." Crooks was scornful. "I seen hunderds of men come
by on the road an' on the ranches, with their bindles on their back
an' that same damn thing in their heads. Hunderds of them. They
come, an' they quit an' go on; an' every damn one of 'em's got a
little piece of land in his head. An' never a God damn one of 'em
ever gets it. Just like heaven. Everybody wants a little piece of
lan'. I read plenty of books out here. Nobody never gets to heaven,
and nobody gets no land. It's just in their head. They're all the
time talkin' about it, but it's jus' in their head." He paused and
looked toward the open door, for the horses were moving restlessly
and the halter chains clinked. A horse whinnied. "I guess
somebody's out there," Crooks said. "Maybe Slim. Slim comes in
sometimes two, three times a night. Slim's a real skinner. He
looks out for his team." He pulled himself painfully upright and
moved toward the door. "That you, Slim?" he called.
 Candy's voice answered. "Slim went in town. Say, you seen
Lennie?"
 "Ya mean the big guy?"
 "Yeah. Seen him around any place?"
 "He's in here," Crooks said shortly. He went back to his bunk and
lay down.
 Candy stood in the doorway scratching his bald wrist and looking
blindly into the lighted room. He made no attempt to enter. "Tell
ya what, Lennie. I been figuring out about them rabbits."
 Crooks said irritably, "You can come in if you want."
 Candy seemed embarrassed. "I do' know. 'Course, if ya want me
to."
 "Come on in. If ever'body's comin' in, you might just as well." It
was difficult for Crooks to conceal his pleasure with anger.
 Candy came in, but he was still embarrassed. "You got a nice cozy
little place in here," he said to Crooks. "Must be nice to have a
room all to yourself this way."
 "Sure," said Crooks. "And a manure pile under the window. Sure,
it's swell."
 Lennie broke in, "You said about them rabbits."
 Candy leaned against the wall beside the broken collar while he
scratched the wrist stump. "I been here a long time," he said. "An'
Crooks been here a long time. This's the first time I ever been in
his room."
 Crooks said darkly, "Guys don't come into a colored man's room
very much. Nobody been here but Slim. Slim an' the boss."
 Candy quickly changed the subject. "Slim's as good a skinner as I
ever seen."
 Lennie leaned toward the old swamper "About them rabbits," he
insisted.
 Candy smiled. "I got it figured out. We can make some money on
them rabbits if we go about it right."
 "But I get to tend'em," Lennie broke in. "George says I get to tend
'em. He promised."
 Crooks interrupted brutally. "You guys is just kiddin' yourself.
You'll talk about it a hell of a lot, but you won't get no land. You'll
be a swamper here till they take you out in a box. Hell, I seen too
many guys. Lennie here'll quit an' be on the road in two, three
weeks. Seems like ever' guy got land in his head."
 Candy rubbed his cheek angrily. "You God damn right we're
gonna do it. George says we are. We got the money right now."
 "Yeah?" said Crooks. "An' where's George now? In town in a
whore house. That's where your money's goin'. Jesus, I seen it
happen too many times. I seen too many guys with land in their
head. They never get none under their hand."
 Candy cried, "Sure they all want it. Everybody wants a little bit of
land, not much. Jus' som'thin' that was his. Som'thin' he could live
on and there couldn't nobody throw him off of it. I never had none.
I planted crops for damn near ever'body in this state, but they
wasn't my crops, and when I harvested 'em, it wasn't none of any
harvest. But we gonna do it now, and don't you make no mistake
about that. George ain't got the money in town. That money's in
the bank. Me an' Lennie an' George. We gonna have a room to
ourself. We're gonna have a dog an' rabbits an' chickens. We're
gonna have green corn an' maybe a cow or a goat." He stopped,
overwhelmed with his picture.
 Crooks asked, "You say you got the money?"
 "Damn right. We got most of it. Just a little bit more to get. Have
it all in one month. George got the land all picked out, too."
 Crooks reached around and explored his spine with his hand. "I
never seen a guy really do it," he said. "I seen guys nearly crazy
with loneliness for land, but ever' time a whore house or a
blackjack game took what it takes." He hesitated. If you . . . . guys
would want a hand to work for nothing-just his keep, why I'd come
an' lend a hand. I ain't so crippled I can't work like a son-of-a-bitch
if I want to."
 "Any you boys seen Curley?"
 They swung their heads toward the door. Looking in was Curley's
wife. Her face was heavily made up. Her lips were slightly parted.
She breathed strongly, as though she had been running.
 "Curley ain't been here," Candy said sourly.
 She stood still in the doorway, smiling a little at them, rubbing
the nails of one hand with the thumb and forefinger of the other.
And her eyes traveled from one face to another. "They left all the
weak ones here," she said finally. "Think I don't know where they
all went? Even Curley. I know where they all went."
 Lennie watched her, fascinated; but Candy and Crooks were
scowling down away from her eyes. Candy said, "Then if you
know, why you want to ast us where Curley is at?"
 She regarded them amusedly. "Funny thing," she said. "If I catch
any one man, and he's alone, I get along fine with him. But just let
two of the guys get together an' you won't talk. Jus' nothing but
mad" She dropped her fingers and put her hands on her hips.
"You're all scared of each other, that's what. Ever' one of you's
scared the rest is goin' to get something on you."
 After a pause Crooks said, "Maybe you better go along to your
own house now. We don't want no trouble."
 "Well, I ain't giving you no trouble. Think I don't like to talk to
somebody ever' once in a while? Think I like to stick in that house
afla time?"
 Candy laid the stump of his wrist on his knee and rubbed it
gently with his hand. He said accusingly, "You gotta husban'. You
got no call foolin' aroun' with other guys, causin' trouble."
 The girl flared up. "Sure I gotta husban'. You all seen him. Swell
guy, ain't he? Spends all his time sayin' what he's gonna do to
guys he don't like, and he don't like nobody. Think I'm gonna stay
in that twoby-four house and listen how Curley's gonna lead with
his left twict, and then bring in the of right cross? `One-two' he
says. `Jus' the of one-two an' he'll go down."' She paused and her
face lost its sullenness and grew interested. "Say-what happened
to Curley's ban'?"
 There was an embarrassed silence. Candy stole a look at Lennie.
Then he coughed. "Why . . . . Curley . . . . he got his han' caught in
a machine, ma'am. Butt his ban'."
 She watched for a moment, and then she laughed. "Baloney!
What you think you're sellin' me? Curley started som'pin' he didn'
finish. Caught in a machine -baloney! Why, he ain't give nobody
the good of onetwo since he got his ban' bust. Who bust him?"
 Candy repeated sullenly, "Got it caught in a machine."
 "Awright," she said contemptuously. "Awright, cover 'im up if ya
wanta. Whatta I care? You bindle bums think you're so damn
good. Whatta ya think I am, a kid? I tell ya I could of went with
shows. Not jus' one, neither. An' a guy tol' me he could put me in
pitchers. . . :' She was breathless with indignation. "Sat'iday night.
Ever'body out doin' som'pin'. Ever'body! An' what am I doin'?
Standin' here talkin' to a bunch of bindle stiffs-a nigger an' a dumdum and a lousy of sheep-n' Orin' it because they ain't nobody
else."
 Lennie watched her, his mouth half open. Crooks had retired into
the terrible protective dignity of the Negro. But a change came
over old Candy. He stood up suddenly and knocked his nail keg
over backward. "I had enough," he said angrily. "You ain't wanted
here. We told you you ain't. An' I tell ya, you got floozy idears
about what us guys amounts to. You ain't got sense enough in that
chicken head to even see that we ain't stiffs. S'pose you get us
canned. S'pose you do. You think we'll hit the highway an' look for
another lousy two-bit job like this. You don't know that we got our
own ranch to go to, an' our own house. We ain't got to stay here.
We gotta house and chickens an' fruit trees an' a place a hunderd
time prettier than this. An' we got fren's, that's what we got.
Maybe there was a time when we was scared of gettin' canned, but
we ain't no more. We got our own lan', and it's ours, an' we c'n go
to it"
 Curley's wife laughed at him. "Baloney," she said. "I seen too
many you guys. If you had two bits in the worl', why you'd be in
gettin' two shots of corn with it and suckin' the bottom of the
glass. I know you guys."
 Candy's face had grown redder and redder, but before she was
done speaking, he had control of himself. He was the master of the
situation. "I might of knew," he said gently. "Maybe you just better
go along an' roll your hoop. We ain't got nothing to say to you at
all. We know what we got, and we don't care whether you know it
or not. So maybe you better jus' scatter along now, 'cause Curley
maybe ain't gonna like his wife out in the barn with us `bindle
stiffs."'
 She looked from one face to another, and they were all closed
against her. And she looked longest at Lennie, until he dropped
his eyes in embarrassment. Suddenly she said, "Where'd you get
them bruises on your face?"
 Lennie looked up guiltily. "Who-me?"
 "Yeah, you."
 Lennie looked to Candy for help, and then he looked at his lap
again. "He got his han' caught in a machine," he said.
 Curley's wife laughed. "O.K., Machine. I'll talk to you later. I like
machines."
 Candy broke in. "You let this guy alone. Don't you do no messing
aroun' with him. I'm gonna tell George what you says. George
won't have you messin' with Lennie."
 "Who's George?" she asked. "The little guy you come with?"
 Lennie smiled happily. "That's him," he said. "That's the guy, an'
he's gonna let me tend the rabbits."
 "Well, if that's all you want, I might get a couple rabbits myself."
 Crooks stood up from his bunk and faced her. "I had enough," he
said coldly. "You got no rights comin' in a colored man's room. You
got no rights messing around in here at all. Now you jus' get out,
an' get out quick. If you don't, I'm gonna ast the boss not to ever
let you come in the barn no more."
 She turned on him in scorn. "Listen, Nigger," she said. "You know
what I can do to you if you open. your trap?"
 Crooks stared hopelessly at her, and then he sat down on his
bunk and drew into himself.
 She closed on him. "You know what I could do?"
 Crooks seemed to grow smaller, and he pressed? himself against
the wall. "Yes, ma'am."
 "Well, you keep your place then, Nigger. I could get you strung up
on a tree so easy it ain't even funny."
 Crooks had reduced himself to nothing. There was no personality,
no ego-nothing to arouse either like or dislike. He said, "Yes,
ma'am," and his voice was toneless.
 For a moment she stood over him. as though waiting for him to
move so that she could whip at him again; but Crooks sat perfectly
still, his eyes averted, everything that might be hurt drawn in.
She turned at last to the other two.
 Old Candy was watching her, fascinated. "If you was to do that,
we'd tell," he said quietly. "We'd tell about you framin' Crooks."
 "Tell an' be damned," she cried. "Nobody'd listen to you, an' you
know it. Nobody'd listen to you."
 Candy subsided. "No ..." he agreed. "Nobody'd listen to us."
 Lennie whined, "I wisht George was here. I wisht George was
here."
 Candy stepped over to him. "Don't you worry none," he said. "I
jus' heard the guys comin' in. George'll be in the bunk house right
now, I bet." He turned to Curley's wife. "You better go home now,"
he said quietly. "If you go right now, we won't tell Curley you was
here."
 She appraised him coolly. "I ain't sure you heard nothing."
 "Better not take no chances," he said. "If you ain't sure, you better
take the safe way."
 She turned to Lennie. "I'm glad you bust up Curley a little bit. He
got it comin' to him. Sometimes I'd like to bust him myself." She
slipped out the door and disappeared into the dark barn. And
while she went through the barn, the halter chains rattled, and
some horses snorted and some stamped their feet.
 Crooks seemed to come slowly out of the layers of protection he
bad put on. "Was that the truth what you said about the guys
come back?" he asked.
 "Sure. I heard 'em."
 "Well, I didn't hear nothing."
 "The gate banged," Candy said, and he went on, "Jesus Christ,
Curley's wife can move quiet. I guess she had a lot of practice,
though."
 Crooks avoided the whole subject now. "Maybe you guys better
go," he said. "I ain't sure I want you in here no more. A colored
man got to have some rights even if he don't like 'em."
 Candy said, "That bitch didn't ought to of said that to you."
 "It wasn't nothing," Crooks said dully. "You guys comin' in an'
settin' made me forget. What she says is true."
 The horses snorted out in the barn and the chains rang and a
voice called, "Lennie. Oh, Lennie. You in the barn?"
 "It's George," Lennie cried. And he answered, "Here, George. I'm
right in here."
 In a second George stood framed in the door, and he looked
disapprovingly about. "What you doin' in Crooks' room? You
hadn't ought to lie here."
 Crooks nodded "I tol' 'em, but they come in anyways."
 "Well, why'n't you kick'em out?"
 "I di'n't care much," said Crooks. "Lennie's a nice fella."
 Now Candy aroused himself. "Oh, George! I been figurin' and
figurin'. I got it doped out how we can even make some money on
them rabbits."
 George scowled. "I thought I tol' you not to tell nobody about
that."
 Candy was crestfallen. "Didn't tell nobody but Crooks."
 George said, "Well you guys get outta here. Jesus, seems like I
can't go away for a minute."
 Candy and Lennie stood up and went toward the door. Crooks
called, "Candy!"
 "Huh?"
 "'Member what I said about hoein' and doin' odd jobs?"
 "Yeah," said Candy. "I remember."
 "Well, jus' forget it," said Crooks. "I didn' mean it. Jus' foolin'. I
wouldn' want to go no place like that."
 "Well, O.K., if you feel like that. Good-night"
 The three men went out of the door. As they went through the
barn the horses snorted and the halter chains rattled.
 Crooks sat on his bunk and looked at the door' for a moment, and
then he reached for the liniment bottle. He pulled out his shirt in
back, poured a little, liniment in his pink palm and, reaching
around, he, fell slowly to rubbing his back.
ONE end of the great barn was piled high with new hay and over
the pile hung the four-taloned jackson fork suspended from its
pulley. The hay came down like a mountain slope to the other end
of the barn, and there was a level place as yet unfilled with the
new crop. At the sides the feeding racks were visible, and between
the slats the heads of horses could be seen.
 It was Sunday afternoon. The resting horses nibbled the
remaining wisps of hay, and they stamped their feet and they bit
the wood of the mangers and rattled the halter chains. The
afternoon sun sliced in through the cracks of the barn walls and
lay in bright lines on the hay. There was the buzz of flies in the
air, the lazy afternoon humming.
 From outside came the clang of horseshoes on the playing peg and
the shouts of men, playing, encouraging, jeering. But in the barn
it was quiet and humming and lazy and warm.
 Only Lennie was in the barn, and Lennie sat in the hay beside a
packing case under a manger in the end of the barn that had not
been filled with hay. Lennie sat in the hay and looked at a little
dead puppy that lay in front of him. Lennie looked at it for a long
time, and then he put out his huge hand and stroked it, stroked it
clear from one end to the other.
 And Lennie said softly to the puppy, "Why do you got to get
killed? You ain't so little as mice. I didn't bounce you hard." He
bent the pup's head up and looked in its face, and he said to it,
"Now maybe George ain't gonna let me tend no rabbits, if he fin's
out you got killed."
 He scooped a little hollow and laid the puppy in it and covered it
over with hay, out of sight; but he continued to stare at the mound
he had made. He said, "This ain't no bad thing like I got to go hide
in the brush. Oh! no. This ain't. I'll tell George I foun' it dead."
 He unburied the puppy and inspected it, and he stroked it from
ears to tail. He went on sorrowfully, "But he'll know. George
always knows. He'll say, 'You done it. Don't try to put nothing over
on me.' An' he'll say, 'Now jus' for that you don't get to tend no
rabbits!"'
 Suddenly his anger arose. "God damn you," he cried. "Why do you
got to get killed? You ain't so little as mice." He picked up the pup
and hurled it from him. He turned his back on it. He sat bent over
his knees and he whispered, "Now I won't get to tend the rabbits.
Now he won't let me." He rocked himself back and forth in his
sorrow.
 From outside came the clang of horseshoes on the iron stake, and
then a little chorus of cries. Lennie got up and brought the puppy
back and laid it on the hay and sat down. He stroked the pup
again. "You wasn't big enough," he said. "They tol' me and tol' me
you wasn't. I di'n't know you'd get killed so easy." He worked his
fingers on the pup's limp ear. "Maybe George won't care," he said.
"This here God damn little son-of-a-bitch wasn't nothing to
George."
 Curley's wife came around the end of the last stall. She came very
quietly, so that Lennie didn't see her. She wore her bright cotton
dress and the mules with the red ostrich feathers. Her face was
made up and the little sausage curls were all in place. She was
quite near to him before Lennie looked up and saw her.
 In a panic he shoveled hay over the puppy with his fingers. He
looked sullenly up at her.She said, "What you got there, sonny
boy?"
 Lennie glared at her. "George says I ain't to have nothing to do
with you-talk to you or nothing."
 She laughed "George giving you orders about everything?"
 Lennie looked down at the hay. "Says I can't tend no rabbits if I
talk to you or anything."
 She said quietly, "He's scared Curley'll get mad. Well, Curley got
his arm in a sling-an' if Curley gets tough, you can break his other
han'. You didn't put nothing over on me about gettin' it caught in
no machine."
 But Lennie was not to be drawn. "No, sir. I ain't gonna talk to you
or nothing."
 She knelt in the hay beside him. "Listen," she said "All the guys
got a horseshoe tenement goin' on. It' on'y about four o'clock. None
of them guys is goin to leave that tenement. Why can't I talk to
you? I never get to talk to nobody. I get awful lonely."
 Lennie said, "Well, I ain't supposed to talk to you or nothing."
 "I get lonely," she said. "You can talk to people, but I can't talk to
nobody but Curley. Else he gets mad. How'd you like not to talk to
anybody?"
 Lennie said, "Well, I ain't supposed to. George's scared I'll get in
trouble."
 She changed the subject. "What you got covered up there?"
 Then all of Lennie's woe came back on him. "Joe my pup," he said
sadly. "Jus' my little pup." And he swept the hay from on top of it.
 "Why, he's dead," she cried.
 "He was so little," said Lennie. "I was jus' playin' with him . . . .
an' he made like he's gonna bite me . . . . an' I made like I was
gonna smack him . . . . an' . . . . an' I done it. An' then he was
dead."
 She consoled him. "Don't you worry none. He was jus' a mutt. You
can get another one easy. The whole country is fulla mutts."
 "It ain't that so much," Lennie explained miserably. "George ain't
gonna let me tend no rabbits now."
 "Why don't he?"
 "Well, he said if I done any more bad things he ain't gonna let me
tend the rabbits."
 She moved closer to him and she spoke soothingly. "Don't you
worry about talkie' to me. Listen to the guys yell out there. They
got four dollars bet in that tenement. None of them ain't gonna
leave till it's over."
 "If George sees me talkin' to you he'll give me hell," Lennie said
cautiously. "He tol' me so."
 Her face grew angry. "Wha's the matter with me?" she cried.
"Ain't I got a right to talk to nobody? Whatta they think I am,
anyways? You're a nice guy. I don't know why I can't talk to you. I
ain't doin' no harm to you."
 "Well, George says you'll get us in a mess."
 "Aw, nuts!" she said. "What kinda harm am I doin' to you? Seems
like they ain't none of them cares how I gotta live. I tell you I ain't
used to livin' like this. I coulda made somethin' of myself." She
said darkly, "Maybe I will yet." And then her words tumbled out in
a passion of communication, as though she hurried before her
listener could be taken away. "I lived right in Salinas," she said.
"Come there when I was a kid. Well, a show come through, an' I
met one of the actors. He says I could go with that show. But my of
lady- wouldn' let me. She says because I was on'y fifteen. But the
guy says I coulda. If I'd went, I wouldn't be livin' like this, you
bet."
 Lennie stroked the pup back and forth. "We gonna have a little
place-an' rabbits," he explained.
 She went on with her story quickly, before she should be
interrupted. "'Nother time I met a guy, an' he was in pitchers.
Went out to the Riverside Dance Palace with him. He says he was
gonna put me in the movies. Says I was a natural. Soon's he got
back to Hollywood he was gonna write to me about it." She looked
closely at Lennie to see whether she was impressing him. "I never
got that letter," she said. "I always thought my of lady stole it.
Well, I wasn't gonna stay no place where I couldn't get nowhere or
make something of myself, an' where they stole your letters. I ast
her if she stole it, too, an' she says no. So I married Curley. Met
him out to the Riverside Dance Palace that same night." She
demanded, "You listenin'?"
 "Me? Sure."
 "Well, I ain't told this to nobody before. Maybe I ought'n to. I
don'like Curley. He ain't a nice fella." And because she had
confided in him, she moved closer to Lennie and sat beside him.
"Coulda been in the movies, an' had nice clothes-all them nice
clothes like they wear. An' I coulda sat in them big hotels, an' had
pitchers took of me. When they had them previews I coulda went
to them, an' spoke in the radio, an' it wouldn'ta cost me a cent
because I was in the pitcher. An' all them nice clothes like they
wear. Because this guy says I was a natural." She looked up at
Lennie, and she made a small grand gesture with her arm and
hand to show that she could act. The fingers trailed after her
leading wrist, and her little finger stuck out grandly from the rest.
 Lennie sighed deeply. From outside came the clang of a horseshoe
on metal, and then a chorus of cheers. "Somebody made a ringer,"
said Curley's wife.
 Now the light was lifting as the sun went down, and the sun
streaks climbed up the wall and fell over the feeding racks and
over the heads of the horses.
 Lennie said, "Maybe if I took this pup out and throwed him away
George wouldn't never know: An' then I could tend the rabbits
without n
 trouble."
 Curley's wife said angrily, "Don't you think of nothing but
rabbits?"
 "We gonna have a little place," Lennie explained patiently. "We
gonna have a house an' a garden and a place for alfalfa, an' that
alfalfa is for the rabbits, an' I take a sack and get it all fulla alfalfa
and then I take it to the rabbits."
 She asked, "What makes you so nuts about rabbits?"
 Lennie had to think carefully before he could come to a
conclusion. He moved cautiously close to her, until he was right
against her. "I like to pet nice things. Once at a fair I seen some of
them long-hair rabbits. An' they was nice, you bet. Sometimes I've
even pet mice, but not when I could get nothing better."
 Curley's wife moved away from him a little. "I think you're nuts,"
she said.
 "No I ain't," Lennie explained earnestly. "George says I ain't. I
like to pet nice things with my fingers, sof' things. "
 She was a little bit reassured. "Well, who don't?" she said.
"Ever'body likes that. I like to feel silk an' velvet. Do you like to
feel velvet?"
 Lennie chuckled with pleasure. "You bet, by God," he cried
happily. "An' I had some, too. A lady give me some, an' that lady
was--my own Aunt Clara. She give it right to me-'bout this big a
piece. I wisht I had that velvet right now." A frown came over his
face. "I lost it," he said. "I ain't seen it for a long time."
 Curley's wife laughed at him. "You're nuts," she said. "But you're
a kinda nice fella. Jus' like a big baby. But a person can see kinda
what you mean. When I'm doin' my hair sometimes I jus' set an'
stroke it 'cause it's so soft." To show how she did it, she ran her
fingers over the top of her head. "Some people got kinda coarse
hair," she said complacently. "Take Curley. His hair is jus' like
wire. But mine is soft and fine. 'Course I brush it a lot. That
makes it fine. Here-feel right here." She took Lennie's hand and
put it on her head. "Feel right aroun' there an' see how soft it is."
 Lennie's big fingers fell to stroking her hair.
 "Don't you muss it up," she said.
 Lennie said, "Oh! That's nice," and he stroked harder. "Oh, that's
nice."
 "Look out, now, you'll muss it." And then she cried angrily, "You
stop it now, you'll mess it all up." She jerked her head sideways,
and Lennie's fingers closed on her hair and hung on. "Let go," she
cried. "You let go!"
 Lennie was in a panic. His face was contorted. She screamed
then, and Lennie's other hand closed over her mouth and nose.
"Please don't," he begged. "Oh! Please don't do that. George'll be
mad."
 She struggled violently under his hands. Her feet battered on the
hay and she writhed to be free; and from under Lennie's hand
came a muffled screaming. Lennie began to cry with fright. "Oh!
Please don't do none of that," he begged. "George gonna say I done
a bad thing. He ain't gonna let me tend no rabbits." He moved his
hand a little and her hoarse cry came out. Then Lennie grew
angry. "Now don't," he said. "I don't want you to yell. You gonna
get me in trouble jus' like George says you will. Now don't you do
that." And she continued to struggle, and her eyes were wild with
terror. He shook her then, and he was angry with her. "Don't you
go yellin'," he said, and he shook her; and her body flopped like a
fish. And then she was still, for Lennie had broken her neck.
 He looked down at her, and carefully be removed his hand from
over her mouth, and she lay still. "I don't want to hurt you," he
said, "but George'll be mad if you yell." When she didn't answer
nor move he bent closely over her. He lifted her arm and let it
drop. For a moment he seemed bewildered. And then he whispered
in fright, "I done a bad thing. I done another bad thing."
 He pawed up the hay until it partly covered her.
 From outside the barn came a cry of men and the double clang of
shoes on metal. For the first time Lennie became conscious of the
outside. He crouched down in the hay and listened. "I done a real
bad thing," he said. "I shouldn't of did that. George'll be mad. An' .
. . . he said . . . . an' hide in the brush till he come. He's gonna be
mad. In the brush till he come. Tha's what he said." Lennie wentback and looked at the dead girl. The puppy lay close to her.
Lennie picked it up. "I'll throw him away," he said. "It's bad
enough like it is." He put the pup under his coat, and he crept to
the barn wall and peered out between the cracks, toward the
horseshoe game. And then he crept around the end of the last
manger and disappeared.
 The sun streaks were high on the wall by now, and the light was
growing soft in the barn. Curley's wife lay on her back, and she
was half covered with hay.
 It was very quiet in the barn, and the quiet of the afternoon was
on the ranch. Even the clang of the pitched shoes, even the voices
of the men in the game seemed to grow more quiet. The air in the
barn was dusky in advance of the outside day. A pigeon flew in
through the open hay door and circled and flew out again. Around
the last stall came a shepherd bitch, lean and long, with heavy,
hanging dugs. Halfway to the packing box where the puppies were
she caught the dead scent of Curley's wife, and the hair arose
along her spine. She whimpered and cringed to the packing box,
and jumped in among the puppies.
 Curley's wife lay with a half-covering of yellow hay. And the
meanness and the plannings and the discontent and the ache for
attention were all gone from her face. She was very pretty and
simple, and her face was sweet and young. Now her rouged cheeks
and her reddened lips made her seem alive and sleeping very
lightly. The curls, tiny little sausages, were spread on the hay
behind her head, and her lips were parted.
 As happens sometimes, a moment settled and hovered and
remained for much more than a moment. And sound stopped and
movement stopped for much, much more than a moment.
 Then gradually time awakened again and moved sluggishly on.
The horses stamped on the other side of the feeding racks and the
halter chains clinked. Outside, the men's voices became louder
and clearer.
 From around the end of the last stall old Candy's voice came.
"Lennie," he called. "Oh, Lennie! You in here? 1 been figuring
some more. Tell you what we can do, Lennie." Old Candy appeared
around the end of the last stall. "Oh, Lennie!" he called again; and
then he stopped, and his body stiffened. He rubbed his smooth
wrist on his white stubble whiskers. "I di'n't know you was here,"
he said to Curley's wife.
 When she didn't answer, he stepped nearer. "You oughten to sleep
out here," he said disapprovingly; and then he was beside her and-
"Oh, Jesus Christ!" He looked about helplessly, and he rubbed his
beard. And then he jumped up and went quickly out of the barn.
 But the barn was alive now. The horses stamped and snorted, and
they chewed the straw of their bedding and they clashed the
chains of their halters. In a moment Candy came back, and
George was with him.
 George said, "What was it you wanted to see me about?"
 Candy pointed at Curley's wife. George stared. "What's the
matter with her?" he asked. He stepped closer, and then he echoed
Candy's words. "Oh, Jesus Christ!" He was down on his knees
beside her.He put his hand over her heart. And finally, when he
stood up, slowly and stify, his face was as hard and tight as wood,
and his eyes were hard.
 Candy said, "What done it?"
 George looked coldly at him. "Ain't you got any idear?" he asked.
And Candy was silent. "I should of knew," George said hopelessly.
"I guess maybe way back in my head I did."
 Candy asked, "What we gonna do now, George? What we gonna
do now?"
 George was a long time in answering. "Guess . . . . we gotta tell
the . . . . guys. I guess we gotta get 'im an' lock 'im up. We can't let
'im get away. Why, the poor bastard'd starve." And he tried to
reassure himself. "Maybe they'll lock 'im up an' be nice to In."
 But Candy said excitedly, "We oughtta let'im get away. You don't
know that Curley. Curley gon'ta wanta get 'im lynched. Curley'll
get 'im killed."
 George watched Candy's lips. "Yeah," he said at last, "that's right,
Curley will. An' the other guys will." And he looked back at
Curley's wife.
 Now Candy spoke his greatest fear. "You an' me can get that little
place, can't we, George? You an' me can go there an' live nice, can't
we, George? Can't we?"
 Before George answered, Candy dropped his head and looked
down at the hay. He knew.
 George said softly, "-I think I knowed from the very first I think I
knowed we'd never do her. He usta like to hear about it so much I
got to thinking maybe we would."
 "Then-it's all off?" Candy said sulkily.
 George didn't answer his question. George said, "I'll work my
month an' I'll take my fifty bucks an' I'll stay all night in some
lousy cat house. Or I'll set in some poolroom till ever'body goes
home. An' then I'll come back an' work another month an! I'll have
fifty bucks more."
 Candy said, "He's such a nice fella. I didn' think he'd do nothing
like this."
 George still stared at Curley's wife. "Lennie never done it in
meanness," he said "All the time he done bad things, but he never
done one of 'em mean." He straightened up and looked back at
Candy. "Now listen. We gotta tell the guys. They got to bring him
in, I guess. They ain't no way out. Maybe they won't hurt'im." He
said sharply, "I ain't gonna let 'em hurt Lennie. Now you listen.
The guys might think I was in on it. I'm gonna go in the bunk
house. Then in a minute you come out and tell the guys about her,
and I'll come along and make like I never seen her. Will you do
that? So the guys won't think I was in on it?"
 Candy said, "Sure, George. Sure I'll do that."
 "O.K. Give me a couple minutes then, and you come runnin' out
an' tell like you jus' found her. I'm going now." George turned and
went quickly out of the barn.
 Old Candy watched him go. He looked helplessly back at Curley's
wife, and gradually his sorrow and his anger grew into words.
"You God damn tramp," be said viciously. "You done it, di'n't you?
I s'pose you're glad. Ever'body knowed you'd mess things up. You
wasn't no good. You ain't no good now, you lousy tart." He
sniveled, and his voice shook. "I could of hoed in the garden and
washed dishes for them guys." He paused, and then went on in a
singsong. And he repeated the old words: "If they was a circus or a
baseball game . . . . we would of went to her . . . . jus' said `ta hell
with work,' an' went to her. Never ast nobody's say so. An' they'd
of been a pig and chickens . . . . an' in the winter . . . . the little fat
stove . . . . an' the rain comin' . . . . an' us jus' settin' there." His
eyes blinded with tears and he turned and went weakly out of the
barn, and he rubbed his bristly whiskers with his wrist stump.
 Outside the noise of the game stopped. There was a rise of voices
in question, a drum of running feet and the men burst into the
barn. Slim and Carlson and young Whit and Curley, and Crooks
keeping back out of attention range. Candy came after them, and
last of all came George. George had put on his blue denim coat and
buttoned it, and his black hat was pulled down low over his eyes.
The men raced around the last stall. Their eyes found Curley's
wife in the gloom, they stopped and stood still and looked.
 Then Slim went quietly over to her, and he felt her wrist. One
lean finger touched her cheek, and then his hand went under her
slightly twisted neck and his fingers explored her neck. When he
stood up the men crowded near and the spell was broken.
 Curley came suddenly to life. "I know who done it," he cried.
"That big son-of-a-bitch done it. I know he done it. Why-ever'body
else was out there playin' horseshoes." He worked himself into a
fury. "I'm gonna get him. I'm going for my shotgun. I'll kill the big
son-of-a-bitch myself. I'll shoot 'im in the guts. Come on, you
guys." He ran furiously out of the barn. Carlson said, "I'll get my
Luger," and he ran out too.
 Slim turned quietly to George. "I guess Lennie done it, all right,"
he said. "Her neck's bust. Lennie coulda did that."
 George didn't answer, but he nodded slowly. His hat was so far
down on his forehead that his eyes were covered.
 Slim went on, "Maybe like that time in Weed you was tellin'
about."
 Again George nodded.
 Slim sighed. "Well, I guess we got to get him. Where you think he
might of went?"
 It seemed to take George some time to free his words. "He-would
of went south," he said. "We come from north so he would of went
south."
 "I guess we gotta get 'im," Slim repeated.
 George stepped close. "Couldn' we maybe bring him in an' they'll
lock him up? He's nuts, Slim. He never done this to be mean."
 Slim nodded. "We might," he said. "If we could keep Curley in, we
might. But Curley's gonna want to shoot 'im. Curley's still mad
about his hand. An' s'pose they lock him up an' strap him down
and put him in a cage. That ain't no good, George."
 "I know," said George. "I know."
 Carlson came running in, "The bastard's stole my Luger," he
shouted. "It ain't in my bag." Curley followed him, and Curley
carried a shotgun in his good hand. Curley was cold now.
 "All right, you guys," he said. "The nigger's got a shotgun. You
take it, Carlson. When you see 'urn, don't give 'im no chance.
Shoot for his guts. That'll double 'im over."
 Whit said excitedly, "I ain't got a gun."
 Curley said, "You go in Soledad an' get a cop. Get AI Wilts, he's
deputy sheriff. Le's go now." He turned suspiciously on George.
"You're comin' with us, fella."
 "Yeah," said George. "I'll come. But listen, Curley. The poor
bastard's nuts. Don't shoot 'im. He di'n't know what he was doin'."
 "Don't shoot 'im?" Curley cried. "He got Carlson's Luger. 'Course
we'll shoot 'im. "
 George said weakly, "Maybe Carlson lost his gun.,,
 "I seen it this morning," said Carlson. "No, it's been took."
 Slim stood looking down at Curley's wife. He said, "Curley-maybe
you better stay here with your wife."
 Curley's face reddened. "I'm goin'," he said. "I'm gonna shoot the
guts outa that big bastard myself, even if I only got one hand. I'm
gonna get 'im."
 Slim turned to Candy. "You stay here with her then, Candy. The
rest of us better get goin'."
 They moved away. George stopped a moment beside Candy and
they both looked down at the dead girl until Curley called, "You
George! You stick with us so we don't think you had nothin' to do
with this."
 George moved slowly after them, and his feet dragged heavily.
 And when they were gone, Candy squatted down in the hay and
watched the face of Curley's wife. "Poor bastard," he said softly.
 The sound of the men grew fainter. The barn was darkening
gradually and, in their stalls, the horses shifted their feet and
rattled the halter chains. Old Candy lay down in the hay and
covered his eyes with his arm.
THE deep green pool of the Salinas River was still in the late
afternoon. Already the sun had left the valley to go climbing up
the slopes of the Gabilan mountains, and the hilltops were rosy in
the sun. But by the pool among the mottled sycamores, a pleasant
shade had fallen.
 A water snake glided smoothly up the pool, twist-ing its periscope
head from side to side; and it swam the length of the pool and
came to the legs of a motionless heron that stood in the shallows.
A silent head and beak lanced down and plucked it out by the
head, and the beak swallowed the little snake while its tail waved
frantically.
 A far rush of wind sounded and a gust drove through the tops of
the trees like a wave. The syca-more leaves turned up their silver
sides, the brown, dry leaves on the ground scudded a few feet. And
row on row of tiny wind waves flowed up the pool's green surface.
 As quickly as it had come, the wind died, and the clearing was
quiet again. The heron stood in the shallows, motionless and
waiting. Another little water snake swam up the pool, turning its
periscope head from side to side.

 Suddenly Lennie appeared out of the brush, and he came as
silently as a creeping bear moves. The heron pounded the air with
its wings, jacked itself clear of the water and flew off down river.
The little snake slid in among the reeds at the pool's side.
 Lennie came quietly to the pool's edge. He knelt down and drank,
barely touching his lips to the water. When a little bird skittered
over the dry leaves behind him, his head jerked up and he
strained toward the sound with eyes and ears until he saw the
bird, and then he dropped his head and drank again.
 When he was finished, he sat down on the bank, with his side to
the pool, so that he could watch the trail's entrance. He embraced
his knees and laid his chin down on his knees.
 The light climbed on out of the valley, and as it went, the tops of
the mountains seemed to blaze with increasing brightness.
 Lennie said softly, "I di'n't forget, you bet, God damn. Hide in the
brush an' wait for George." He pulled his hat down low over his
eyes. "George gonna give me hell," he said. "George gonna wish he
was alone an' not have me botherin' him." He turned his head and
looked at the bright mountain tops. "I can go right off there an'
find a cave," he said. And he continued sadly, "-an' never have no
ketchup-but I won't care. If George don't want me . . . . I'll go
away. I'll go away."
 And then from out of Lennie's head there came a little fat old
woman. She wore thick bull's-eye glasses and she wore a huge
gingham apron with pockets, and she was starched and clean. She
stood in front of Lennie and put her hands on her hips, and she
frowned disapprovingly at him.
 And when she spoke, it was in Lennie's voice. "I tol' you an' tol'
you," she said. "I tol' you, `Min' George because he's such a nice
fella an' good to you.' But you don't never take no care. You do bad
things."
 And Lennie answered her, "I tried, Aunt Clara, ma'am. I tried
and tried. I couldn' help it."
 "You never give a thought to George," she went on in Lennie's
voice. "He been doin' nice things for you alla time. When he got a
piece of pie you always got half or more'n half. An' if they was any
ketchup, why he'd give it all to you."
 "I know," said Lennie miserably. "I tried, Aunt Clara, ma'am. I
tried and tried."
 She interrupted him. "All the time he coulda had such a good
time if it wasn't for you. He woulda took his pay an' raised hell in
a whore house, and he coulda set in a poolroom an' played
snooker. But he got to take care of you."
 Lennie moaned with grief. "I know, Aunt Clara, ma'am. I'll go
right off in the hills an' I'll fin' a cave an' I'll live there so I won't
be no more trouble to George."
 "You jus' say that," she said sharply. "You're al-ways sayin' that,
an' you know sonofabitching well you ain't never gonna do it.
You'll jus' stick around an' stew the b'Jesus outa George all the
time."
 Lennie said, "I might jus' as well go away. George ain't gonna let
me tend no rabbits now."
 Aunt Clara was gone, and from out of Lennie's head there came a
gigantic rabbit. It sat on its haunches in front of him, and it
waggled its ears and crinkled its nose at him. And it spoke in
Lennie's voice too.
 "Tend rabbits," it said scornfully. "You crazy bastard. You ain't fit
to lick the boots of no rabbit. You'd forget 'em and let 'em go
hungry. That's what you'd do. An' then what would George think?"
 "I would not forget," Lennie said loudly.
 "The hell you wouldn'," said the rabbit. "You ain't worth a greased
jack-pin to ram you into hell. Christ knows George done ever'thing
he could to jack you outa the sewer, but it don't do no good. If you
think George gonna let you tend rabbits, you're even crazier'n
usual. He ain't. He's gonna bear hell outa you with a stick, that's
what he's gonna do."
 Now Lennie retorted belligerently, "He ain't neither. George won't
do nothing like that. I've knew George since-1 forget when-and he
ain't never raised his ban' to me with a stick. He's nice to me. He
ain't gonna be mean."
 "Well, he's sick of you," said the rabbit. "He's gonna beat hell outa
you an' then go away an' leave you."
 "He won't," Lennie cried frantically. "He won't do nothing like
that. I know George. Me an' him travels together."
 But the rabbit repeated softly over and over, "He gonna leave you,
ya crazy bastard. He gonna leave ya all alone. He gonna leave ya,
crazy bastard."

 Lennie put his hands over his ears. "He ain't, I tell ya he ain't."
And he cried, "Oh! George-George--George!"
 George came quietly out of the brush and the rabbit scuttled back
into Lennie's brain.
 George said quietly, "What the hell you yellin' about?"
 Lennie got up on his knees. "You ain't gonna leave me, are ya,
George? I know you ain't."
 George came stiffly near and sat down beside him.
 "No."
 "I knowed it," Lennie cried. "You ain't that kind."
 George was silent.
 Lennie said, "George."
 "Yeah ?"
 "I done another bad thing."
 "It don't make no difference," George said, and he fell silent
again.
 Only the topmost ridges were in the sun now. The shadow in the
valley was blue and soft. From the distance came the sound of
men shouting to one another. George turned his head and listened
to the shouts.
 Lennie said, "George."
 "Yeah ?"
 "Ain't you gonna give me hell?"
 "Give ya hell?"
 "Sure, like you always done before. Like, `If I di'n't have you I'd
take my fifty bucks' "
 "Jesus Christ, Lennie! You can't remember nothing that happens,
but you remember ever' word I say.„
 "Well, ain't you gonna say it?"
 George shook himself. He said woodenly, "If I was alone I could
live so easy." His voice was mo-notonous, had no emphasis. "I
could get a job an' not have no mess." He stopped
 "Go on," said Lennie. "An' when the enda the month come-"
 "An' when the end of the month come I could take my fifty bucks
an' go to a . . . . cat house. . . ." He stopped again.
 Lennie looked eagerly at him. "Go on, George. Ain't you gonna
give me no more hell?"
 "No," said George.
 "Well, I can go away," said Lennie. "I'll go right off in the hills an'
find a cave if you don' want me."
 George shook himself again. "No," he said. "I want you to stay
with me here."
 Lennie said craftily- "Tell me like you done before."
 "Tell you what?"
 "'Bout the other guys an' about us."
 George said, "Guys like us got no fambly. They make a little stake
an' then they blow it in. They ain't got nobody in the worl' that
gives a hoot in hell about 'em-"
 "But not us," Lennie cried happily. "Tell about us now."
 George was quiet for a moment. "But not us," he said.

 "Because-"
 "Because I got you an''
 "An' I got you. We got each other, that's what, that gives a hoot in
hell about us," Lennie cried in triumph.
 The little evening breeze blew over the clearing and the leaves
rustled and the wind waves flowed up the green pool. And the
shouts of men sounded again, this time much closer than before.
 George took off his hat. He said shakily, "Take off your hat,
Lennie. The air feels fine."
 Lennie removed his hat dutifully and laid it on the ground in
front of him. The shadow in the val-ley was bluer, and the evening
came fast. On the wind the sound of crashing in the brush came to
them.
 Lennie said, "Tell how it's gonna be."
 George had been listening to the distant sounds. For a moment he
was business-like. "Look acrost the river, Lennie, an' I'll tell you so
you can almost see it."
 Lennie turned his head and looked off across the pool and up the
darkening slopes of the Gabilans. "We gonna get a little place,"
George began. He reached in his side pocket and brought out
Carlson's Luger; he snapped off the safety, and the hand and gun
lay on the ground behind Lennie's back. He looked at the back of
Lennie's head, at the place where the spine and skull were joined.
 A man's voice called from up the river, and an-other man
answered.
 "Go on," said Lennie.
 George raised the gun and his hands shook, and he dropped his
hand to the ground again.
 "Go on," said Lennie. "How's it gonna be. We gonna get a little
place."
 "We'll have a cow," said George. "An' we'll have maybe a pig an'
chickens . . . . an' down the flat we'll have a . . . . little piece alfalfa-
"
 "For the rabbits," Lennie shouted.
 "For the rabbits," George repeated.
 "And I get to tend the rabbits."
 "An' you get to tend the rabbits."
 Lennie giggled with happiness. "An' live on the fatta the lan'."
 "Yes."
 Lennie turned his head.
 "No, Lennie. Look down there acrost the river, like you can
almost see the place."
 Lennie obeyed him. George looked down at the gun.
 There were crashing footsteps in the brush now. George turned
and looked toward them.
 "Go on, George. When we gonna do it?"
 "Gonna do it soon."
 "Me an' you."
 "You . . . . an' me. Ever'body gonna be nice to you. Ain't gonna be
no more trouble. Nobody gon-na hurt nobody nor steal from 'em."
 Lennie said, "I thought you was mad at me, George."
 "No," said George. "No, Lennie. I ain't mad. I never been mad, an'
I ain't now. That's a thing I want ya to know."
 The voices came close now. George raised the gun and listened to
the voices.
 Lennie begged, "Le's do it now. Le's get that place now."
 "Sure, right now. I gotta. We gotta."
 And George raised the gun and steadied it, and he brought the
muzzle of it close to the back of Lennie's head. The hand shook
violently, but his face set and his hand steadied. He pulled the
trigger. The crash of the shot rolled up the hills and rolled down
again. Lennie jarred, and then settled slowly forward to the sand,
and he lay without quivering.
 George shivered and looked at the gun, and then he threw it from
him, back up on the bank, near the pile of old ashes.
 The brush seemed filled with cries and with the sound of running
feet. Slim's voice shouted, "George. Where you at, George?"
 But George sat stify on the bank and looked at his right hand
that had thrown the gun away. The group burst into the clearing,
and Curley was ahead. He saw Lennie lying on the sand. "Got
him, by God." He went over and looked down at Lennie, and then
he looked back at George. "Right in the back of the head," he said
softly.
 Slim came directly to George and sat down beside him, sat very
close to him. "Never you mind," said Slim. "A guy got to
sometimes."
 But Carlson was standing over George. "How'd you do it?" he
asked.
 "I just done it," George said tiredly.
 "Did he have my gun?"
 "Yeah. He had your gun."
 "An' you got it away from him and you took it an' you killed him?"
 "Yeah. Tha's how." George's voice was almost a whisper. He
looked steadily at his right hand that had held the gun.
 Slim twitched George's elbow. "Come on, George. Me an' you'll go
in an' get a drink."
 George let himself be helped to his feet. "Yeah, a drink."
 Slim said, "You hadda, George. I swear you had-da. Come on with
me." He led George into the entrance of the trail and up toward
the highway.
 Curley and Carlson looked after them. And Carlson said, "Now
what the hell ya suppose is eatin' them two guys?"
Mr. Jones, of the Manor Farm, had locked the hen-houses for the night, but was too drunk to
remember to shut the pop-holes. With the ring of light from his lantern dancing from side to
side, he lurched across the yard, kicked off his boots at the back door, drew himself a last
glass of beer from the barrel in the scullery, and made his way up to bed, where Mrs. Jones
was already snoring.
As soon as the light in the bedroom went out there was a stirring and a fluttering all through
the farm buildings. Word had gone round during the day that old Major, the prize Middle
White boar, had had a strange dream on the previous night and wished to communicate it to
the other animals. It had been agreed that they should all meet in the big barn as soon as Mr.
Jones was safely out of the way. Old Major (so he was always called, though the name under
which he had been exhibited was Willingdon Beauty) was so highly regarded on the farm that
everyone was quite ready to lose an hour’s sleep in order to hear what he had to say.
At one end of the big barn, on a sort of raised platform, Major was already ensconced on his
bed of straw, under a lantern which hung from a beam. He was twelve years old and had
lately grown rather stout, but he was still a majestic-looking pig, with a wise and benevolent
appearance in spite of the fact that his tushes had never been cut. Before long the other
animals began to arrive and make themselves comfortable after their different fashions. First
came the three dogs, Bluebell, Jessie, and Pincher, and then the pigs, who settled down in the
straw immediately in front of the platform. The hens perched themselves on the window-sills,
the pigeons fluttered up to the rafters, the sheep and cows lay down behind the pigs and
began to chew the cud. The two cart-horses, Boxer and Clover, came in together, walking
very slowly and setting down their vast hairy hoofs with great care lest there should be some
small animal concealed in the straw. Clover was a stout motherly mare approaching middle
life, who had never quite got her figure back after her fourth foal. Boxer was an enormous
beast, nearly eighteen hands high, and as strong as any two ordinary horses put together. A
white stripe down his nose gave him a somewhat stupid appearance, and in fact he was not of
first-rate intelligence, but he was universally respected for his steadiness of character and
tremendous powers of work. After the horses came Muriel, the white goat, and Benjamin, the
donkey. Benjamin was the oldest animal on the farm, and the worst tempered. He seldom
talked, and when he did, it was usually to make some cynical remark — for instance, he
would say that God had given him a tail to keep the flies off, but that he would sooner have
had no tail and no flies. Alone among the animals on the farm he never laughed. If asked
why, he would say that he saw nothing to laugh at. Nevertheless, without openly admitting it,
he was devoted to Boxer; the two of them usually spent their Sundays together in the small
paddock beyond the orchard, grazing side by side and never speaking.
The two horses had just lain down when a brood of ducklings, which had lost their mother,
filed into the barn, cheeping feebly and wandering from side to side to find some place where
they would not be trodden on. Clover made a sort of wall round them with her great foreleg,
and the ducklings nestled down inside it and promptly fell asleep. At the last moment Mollie,
the foolish, pretty white mare who drew Mr. Jones’s trap, came mincing daintily in, chewing
at a lump of sugar. She took a place near the front and began flirting her white mane, hoping
to draw attention to the red ribbons it was plaited with. Last of all came the cat, who looked
round, as usual, for the warmest place, and finally squeezed herself in between Boxer and
Clover; there she purred contentedly throughout Major’s speech without listening to a word
of what he was saying.
All the animals were now present except Moses, the tame raven, who slept on a perch behind
the back door. When Major saw that they had all made themselves comfortable and were
waiting attentively, he cleared his throat and began:
“Comrades, you have heard already about the strange dream that I had last night. But I will
come to the dream later. I have something else to say first. I do not think, comrades, that I
shall be with you for many months longer, and before I die, I feel it my duty to pass on to you
such wisdom as I have acquired. I have had a long life, I have had much time for thought as I
lay alone in my stall, and I think I may say that I understand the nature of life on this earth as
well as any animal now living. It is about this that I wish to speak to you.
“Now, comrades, what is the nature of this life of ours? Let us face it: our lives are miserable,
laborious, and short. We are born, we are given just so much food as will keep the breath in
our bodies, and those of us who are capable of it are forced to work to the last atom of our
strength; and the very instant that our usefulness has come to an end we are slaughtered with
hideous cruelty. No animal in England knows the meaning of happiness or leisure after he is
a year old. No animal in England is free. The life of an animal is misery and slavery: that is
the plain truth.
“But is this simply part of the order of nature? Is it because this land of ours is so poor that it
cannot afford a decent life to those who dwell upon it? No, comrades, a thousand times no!
The soil of England is fertile, its climate is good, it is capable of affording food in abundance
to an enormously greater number of animals than now inhabit it. This single farm of ours
would support a dozen horses, twenty cows, hundreds of sheep — and all of them living in a
comfort and a dignity that are now almost beyond our imagining. Why then do we continue
in this miserable condition? Because nearly the whole of the produce of our labour is stolen
from us by human beings. There, comrades, is the answer to all our problems. It is summed
up in a single word — Man. Man is the only real enemy we have. Remove Man from the
scene, and the root cause of hunger and overwork is abolished for ever.
“Man is the only creature that consumes without producing. He does not give milk, he does
not lay eggs, he is too weak to pull the plough, he cannot run fast enough to catch rabbits. Yet
he is lord of all the animals. He sets them to work, he gives back to them the bare minimum
that will prevent them from starving, and the rest he keeps for himself. Our labour tills the
soil, our dung fertilises it, and yet there is not one of us that owns more than his bare skin.
You cows that I see before me, how many thousands of gallons of milk have you given
during this last year? And what has happened to that milk which should have been breeding
up sturdy calves? Every drop of it has gone down the throats of our enemies. And you hens,
how many eggs have you laid in this last year, and how many of those eggs ever hatched into
chickens? The rest have all gone to market to bring in money for Jones and his men. And
you, Clover, where are those four foals you bore, who should have been the support and
pleasure of your old age? Each was sold at a year old — you will never see one of them
again. In return for your four confinements and all your labour in the fields, what have you
ever had except your bare rations and a stall?
“And even the miserable lives we lead are not allowed to reach their natural span. For myself
I do not grumble, for I am one of the lucky ones. I am twelve years old and have had over
four hundred children. Such is the natural life of a pig. But no animal escapes the cruel knife
in the end. You young porkers who are sitting in front of me, every one of you will scream
your lives out at the block within a year. To that horror we all must come — cows, pigs, hens,
sheep, everyone. Even the horses and the dogs have no better fate. You, Boxer, the very day
that those great muscles of yours lose their power, Jones will sell you to the knacker, who
will cut your throat and boil you down for the foxhounds. As for the dogs, when they grow
old and toothless, Jones ties a brick round their necks and drowns them in the nearest pond.
“Is it not crystal clear, then, comrades, that all the evils of this life of ours spring from the
tyranny of human beings? Only get rid of Man, and the produce of our labour would be our
own. Almost overnight we could become rich and free. What then must we do? Why, work
night and day, body and soul, for the overthrow of the human race! That is my message to
you, comrades: Rebellion! I do not know when that Rebellion will come, it might be in a
week or in a hundred years, but I know, as surely as I see this straw beneath my feet, that
sooner or later justice will be done. Fix your eyes on that, comrades, throughout the short
remainder of your lives! And above all, pass on this message of mine to those who come after
you, so that future generations shall carry on the struggle until it is victorious.
“And remember, comrades, your resolution must never falter. No argument must lead you
astray. Never listen when they tell you that Man and the animals have a common interest, that
the prosperity of the one is the prosperity of the others. It is all lies. Man serves the interests
of no creature except himself. And among us animals let there be perfect unity, perfect
comradeship in the struggle. All men are enemies. All animals are comrades.”
At this moment there was a tremendous uproar. While Major was speaking four large rats had
crept out of their holes and were sitting on their hindquarters, listening to him. The dogs had
suddenly caught sight of them, and it was only by a swift dash for their holes that the rats
saved their lives. Major raised his trotter for silence.
“Comrades,” he said, “here is a point that must be settled. The wild creatures, such as rats and
rabbits — are they our friends or our enemies? Let us put it to the vote. I propose this
question to the meeting: Are rats comrades?”
The vote was taken at once, and it was agreed by an overwhelming majority that rats were
comrades. There were only four dissentients, the three dogs and the cat, who was afterwards
discovered to have voted on both sides. Major continued:
“I have little more to say. I merely repeat, remember always your duty of enmity towards
Man and all his ways. Whatever goes upon two legs is an enemy. Whatever goes upon four
legs, or has wings, is a friend. And remember also that in fighting against Man, we must not
come to resemble him. Even when you have conquered him, do not adopt his vices. No
animal must ever live in a house, or sleep in a bed, or wear clothes, or drink alcohol, or
smoke tobacco, or touch money, or engage in trade. All the habits of Man are evil. And,
above all, no animal must ever tyrannise over his own kind. Weak or strong, clever or simple,
we are all brothers. No animal must ever kill any other animal. All animals are equal.
“And now, comrades, I will tell you about my dream of last night. I cannot describe that
dream to you. It was a dream of the earth as it will be when Man has vanished. But it
reminded me of something that I had long forgotten. Many years ago, when I was a little pig,
my mother and the other sows used to sing an old song of which they knew only the tune and
the first three words. I had known that tune in my infancy, but it had long since passed out of
my mind. Last night, however, it came back to me in my dream. And what is more, the words
of the song also came back-words, I am certain, which were sung by the animals of long ago
and have been lost to memory for generations. I will sing you that song now, comrades. I am
old and my voice is hoarse, but when I have taught you the tune, you can sing it better for
yourselves. It is called ‘Beasts of England’.”
Old Major cleared his throat and began to sing. As he had said, his voice was hoarse, but he
sang well enough, and it was a stirring tune, something between ‘Clementine’ and ‘La
Cucaracha’. The words ran:
Beasts of England, beasts of Ireland,
Beasts of every land and clime,
Hearken to my joyful tidings
Of the golden future time.
Soon or late the day is coming,
Tyrant Man shall be o’erthrown,
And the fruitful fields of England
Shall be trod by beasts alone.
Rings shall vanish from our noses,
And the harness from our back,
Bit and spur shall rust forever,
Cruel whips no more shall crack.
Riches more than mind can picture,
Wheat and barley, oats and hay,
Clover, beans, and mangel-wurzels
Shall be ours upon that day.
Bright will shine the fields of England,
Purer shall its waters be,
Sweeter yet shall blow its breezes
On the day that sets us free.
For that day we all must labour,
Though we die before it break;
Cows and horses, geese and turkeys,
All must toil for freedom’s sake.
Beasts of England, beasts of Ireland,
Beasts of every land and clime,
Hearken well and spread my tidings
Of the golden future time.
The singing of this song threw the animals into the wildest excitement. Almost before Major
had reached the end, they had begun singing it for themselves. Even the stupidest of them had
already picked up the tune and a few of the words, and as for the clever ones, such as the pigs
and dogs, they had the entire song by heart within a few minutes. And then, after a few
preliminary tries, the whole farm burst out into ‘Beasts of England’ in tremendous unison.
The cows lowed it, the dogs whined it, the sheep bleated it, the horses whinnied it, the ducks
quacked it. They were so delighted with the song that they sang it right through five times in
succession, and might have continued singing it all night if they had not been interrupted.
Unfortunately, the uproar awoke Mr. Jones, who sprang out of bed, making sure that there
was a fox in the yard. He seized the gun which always stood in a corner of his bedroom, and
let fly a charge of number 6 shot into the darkness. The pellets buried themselves in the wall
of the barn and the meeting broke up hurriedly. Everyone fled to his own sleeping-place. The
birds jumped on to their perches, the animals settled down in the straw, and the whole farm
was asleep in a moment.
Three nights later old Major died peacefully in his sleep. His body was buried at the foot of
the orchard.
This was early in March. During the next three months there was much secret activity.
Major’s speech had given to the more intelligent animals on the farm a completely new
outlook on life. They did not know when the Rebellion predicted by Major would take place,
they had no reason for thinking that it would be within their own lifetime, but they saw
clearly that it was their duty to prepare for it. The work of teaching and organising the others
fell naturally upon the pigs, who were generally recognised as being the cleverest of the
animals. Pre-eminent among the pigs were two young boars named Snowball and Napoleon,
whom Mr. Jones was breeding up for sale. Napoleon was a large, rather fierce-looking
Berkshire boar, the only Berkshire on the farm, not much of a talker, but with a reputation for
getting his own way. Snowball was a more vivacious pig than Napoleon, quicker in speech
and more inventive, but was not considered to have the same depth of character. All the other
male pigs on the farm were porkers. The best known among them was a small fat pig named
Squealer, with very round cheeks, twinkling eyes, nimble movements, and a shrill voice. He
was a brilliant talker, and when he was arguing some difficult point he had a way of skipping
from side to side and whisking his tail which was somehow very persuasive. The others said
of Squealer that he could turn black into white.
These three had elaborated old Major’s teachings into a complete system of thought, to which
they gave the name of Animalism. Several nights a week, after Mr. Jones was asleep, they
held secret meetings in the barn and expounded the principles of Animalism to the others. At
the beginning they met with much stupidity and apathy. Some of the animals talked of the
duty of loyalty to Mr. Jones, whom they referred to as “Master,” or made elementary remarks
such as “Mr. Jones feeds us. If he were gone, we should starve to death.” Others asked such
questions as “Why should we care what happens after we are dead?” or “If this Rebellion is
to happen anyway, what difference does it make whether we work for it or not?”, and the pigs
had great difficulty in making them see that this was contrary to the spirit of Animalism. The
stupidest questions of all were asked by Mollie, the white mare. The very first question she
asked Snowball was:“Will there still be sugar after the Rebellion?”
“No,” said Snowball firmly. “We have no means of making sugar on this farm. Besides, you
do not need sugar. You will have all the oats and hay you want.”
“And shall I still be allowed to wear ribbons in my mane?” asked Mollie.
“Comrade,” said Snowball, “those ribbons that you are so devoted to are the badge of slavery.
Can you not understand that liberty is worth more than ribbons?”
Mollie agreed, but she did not sound very convinced.
The pigs had an even harder struggle to counteract the lies put about by Moses, the tame
raven. Moses, who was Mr. Jones’s especial pet, was a spy and a tale-bearer, but he was also
a clever talker. He claimed to know of the existence of a mysterious country called
Sugarcandy Mountain, to which all animals went when they died. It was situated somewhere
up in the sky, a little distance beyond the clouds, Moses said. In Sugarcandy Mountain it was
Sunday seven days a week, clover was in season all the year round, and lump sugar and
linseed cake grew on the hedges. The animals hated Moses because he told tales and did no
work, but some of them believed in Sugarcandy Mountain, and the pigs had to argue very
hard to persuade them that there was no such place.
Their most faithful disciples were the two cart-horses, Boxer and Clover. These two had great
difficulty in thinking anything out for themselves, but having once accepted the pigs as their
teachers, they absorbed everything that they were told, and passed it on to the other animals
by simple arguments. They were unfailing in their attendance at the secret meetings in the
barn, and led the singing of ‘Beasts of England’, with which the meetings always ended.
Now, as it turned out, the Rebellion was achieved much earlier and more easily than anyone
had expected. In past years Mr. Jones, although a hard master, had been a capable farmer, but
of late he had fallen on evil days. He had become much disheartened after losing money in a
lawsuit, and had taken to drinking more than was good for him. For whole days at a time he
would lounge in his Windsor chair in the kitchen, reading the newspapers, drinking, and
occasionally feeding Moses on crusts of bread soaked in beer. His men were idle and
dishonest, the fields were full of weeds, the buildings wanted roofing, the hedges were
neglected, and the animals were underfed.
June came and the hay was almost ready for cutting. On Midsummer’s Eve, which was a
Saturday, Mr. Jones went into Willingdon and got so drunk at the Red Lion that he did not
come back till midday on Sunday. The men had milked the cows in the early morning and
then had gone out rabbiting, without bothering to feed the animals. When Mr. Jones got back
he immediately went to sleep on the drawing-room sofa with the News of the World over his
face, so that when evening came, the animals were still unfed. At last they could stand it no
longer. One of the cows broke in the door of the store-shed with her horn and all the animals
began to help themselves from the bins. It was just then that Mr. Jones woke up. The next
moment he and his four men were in the store-shed with whips in their hands, lashing out in
all directions. This was more than the hungry animals could bear. With one accord, though
nothing of the kind had been planned beforehand, they flung themselves upon their
tormentors. Jones and his men suddenly found themselves being butted and kicked from all
sides. The situation was quite out of their control. They had never seen animals behave like
this before, and this sudden uprising of creatures whom they were used to thrashing and
maltreating just as they chose, frightened them almost out of their wits. After only a moment
or two they gave up trying to defend themselves and took to their heels. A minute later all
five of them were in full flight down the cart-track that led to the main road, with the animals
pursuing them in triumph.
Mrs. Jones looked out of the bedroom window, saw what was happening, hurriedly flung a
few possessions into a carpet bag, and slipped out of the farm by another way. Moses sprang
off his perch and flapped after her, croaking loudly. Meanwhile the animals had chased Jones
and his men out on to the road and slammed the five-barred gate behind them. And so, almost
before they knew what was happening, the Rebellion had been successfully carried through:
Jones was expelled, and the Manor Farm was theirs.
For the first few minutes the animals could hardly believe in their good fortune. Their first act
was to gallop in a body right round the boundaries of the farm, as though to make quite sure
that no human being was hiding anywhere upon it; then they raced back to the farm buildings
to wipe out the last traces of Jones’s hated reign. The harness-room at the end of the stables
was broken open; the bits, the nose-rings, the dog-chains, the cruel knives with which Mr.
Jones had been used to castrate the pigs and lambs, were all flung down the well. The reins,
the halters, the blinkers, the degrading nosebags, were thrown on to the rubbish fire which
was burning in the yard. So were the whips. All the animals capered with joy when they saw
the whips going up in flames. Snowball also threw on to the fire the ribbons with which the
horses’ manes and tails had usually been decorated on market days.
“Ribbons,” he said, “should be considered as clothes, which are the mark of a human being.
All animals should go naked.”
When Boxer heard this he fetched the small straw hat which he wore in summer to keep the
flies out of his ears, and flung it on to the fire with the rest.
In a very little while the animals had destroyed everything that reminded them of Mr. Jones.
Napoleon then led them back to the store-shed and served out a double ration of corn to
everybody, with two biscuits for each dog. Then they sang ‘Beasts of England’ from end to
end seven times running, and after that they settled down for the night and slept as they had
never slept before.
But they woke at dawn as usual, and suddenly remembering the glorious thing that had
happened, they all raced out into the pasture together. A little way down the pasture there was
a knoll that commanded a view of most of the farm. The animals rushed to the top of it and
gazed round them in the clear morning light. Yes, it was theirs — everything that they could
see was theirs! In the ecstasy of that thought they gambolled round and round, they hurled
themselves into the air in great leaps of excitement. They rolled in the dew, they cropped
mouthfuls of the sweet summer grass, they kicked up clods of the black earth and snuffed its
rich scent. Then they made a tour of inspection of the whole farm and surveyed with
speechless admiration the ploughland, the hayfield, the orchard, the pool, the spinney. It was
as though they had never seen these things before, and even now they could hardly believe
that it was all their own.
Then they filed back to the farm buildings and halted in silence outside the door of the
farmhouse. That was theirs too, but they were frightened to go inside. After a moment,
however, Snowball and Napoleon butted the door open with their shoulders and the animals
entered in single file, walking with the utmost care for fear of disturbing anything. They
tiptoed from room to room, afraid to speak above a whisper and gazing with a kind of awe at
the unbelievable luxury, at the beds with their feather mattresses, the looking-glasses, the
horsehair sofa, the Brussels carpet, the lithograph of Queen Victoria over the drawing-room
mantelpiece. They were lust coming down the stairs when Mollie was discovered to be
missing. Going back, the others found that she had remained behind in the best bedroom. She
had taken a piece of blue ribbon from Mrs. Jones’s dressing-table, and was holding it against
her shoulder and admiring herself in the glass in a very foolish manner. The others
reproached her sharply, and they went outside. Some hams hanging in the kitchen were taken
out for burial, and the barrel of beer in the scullery was stove in with a kick from Boxer’s
hoof, otherwise nothing in the house was touched. A unanimous resolution was passed on the
spot that the farmhouse should be preserved as a museum. All were agreed that no animal
must ever live there.
The animals had their breakfast, and then Snowball and Napoleon called them together again.
“Comrades,” said Snowball, “it is half-past six and we have a long day before us. Today we
begin the hay harvest. But there is another matter that must be attended to first.”
The pigs now revealed that during the past three months they had taught themselves to read
and write from an old spelling book which had belonged to Mr. Jones’s children and which
had been thrown on the rubbish heap. Napoleon sent for pots of black and white paint and led
the way down to the five-barred gate that gave on to the main road. Then Snowball (for it was
Snowball who was best at writing) took a brush between the two knuckles of his trotter,
painted out MANOR FARM from the top bar of the gate and in its place painted ANIMAL
FARM. This was to be the name of the farm from now onwards. After this they went back to
the farm buildings, where Snowball and Napoleon sent for a ladder which they caused to be
set against the end wall of the big barn. They explained that by their studies of the past three
months the pigs had succeeded in reducing the principles of Animalism to Seven
Commandments. These Seven Commandments would now be inscribed on the wall; they
would form an unalterable law by which all the animals on Animal Farm must live for ever
after. With some difficulty (for it is not easy for a pig to balance himself on a ladder)
Snowball climbed up and set to work, with Squealer a few rungs below him holding the
paint-pot. The Commandments were written on the tarred wall in great white letters that
could be read thirty yards away.
It was very neatly written, and except that “friend” was written “freind” and one of the “S’s”
was the wrong way round, the spelling was correct all the way through. Snowball read it
aloud for the benefit of the others. All the animals nodded in complete agreement, and the
cleverer ones at once began to learn the Commandments by heart.
“Now, comrades,” cried Snowball, throwing down the paint-brush, “to the hayfield! Let us
make it a point of honour to get in the harvest more quickly than Jones and his men could
do.”
But at this moment the three cows, who had seemed uneasy for some time past, set up a loud
lowing. They had not been milked for twenty-four hours, and their udders were almost
bursting. After a little thought, the pigs sent for buckets and milked the cows fairly
successfully, their trotters being well adapted to this task. Soon there were five buckets of
frothing creamy milk at which many of the animals looked with considerable interest.
“What is going to happen to all that milk?” said someone.
“Jones used sometimes to mix some of it in our mash,” said one of the hens.
“Never mind the milk, comrades!” cried Napoleon, placing himself in front of the buckets.
“That will be attended to. The harvest is more important. Comrade Snowball will lead the
way. I shall follow in a few minutes. Forward, comrades! The hay is waiting.”
So the animals trooped down to the hayfield to begin the harvest, and when they came back
in the evening it was noticed that the milk had disappeared.
How they toiled and sweated to get the hay in! But their efforts were rewarded, for the
harvest was an even bigger success than they had hoped.
Sometimes the work was hard; the implements had been designed for human beings and not
for animals, and it was a great drawback that no animal was able to use any tool that involved
standing on his hind legs. But the pigs were so clever that they could think of a way round
every difficulty. As for the horses, they knew every inch of the field, and in fact understood
the business of mowing and raking far better than Jones and his men had ever done. The pigs
did not actually work, but directed and supervised the others. With their superior knowledge
it was natural that they should assume the leadership. Boxer and Clover would harness
themselves to the cutter or the horse-rake (no bits or reins were needed in these days, of
course) and tramp steadily round and round the field with a pig walking behind and calling
out“Gee up, comrade!” or “Whoa back, comrade!” as the case might be. And every animal
down to the humblest worked at turning the hay and gathering it. Even the ducks and hens
toiled to and fro all day in the sun, carrying tiny wisps of hay in their beaks. In the end they
finished the harvest in two days’ less time than it had usually taken Jones and his men.
Moreover, it was the biggest harvest that the farm had ever seen. There was no wastage
whatever; the hens and ducks with their sharp eyes had gathered up the very last stalk. And
not an animal on the farm had stolen so much as a mouthful.
All through that summer the work of the farm went like clockwork. The animals were happy
as they had never conceived it possible to be. Every mouthful of food was an acute positive
pleasure, now that it was truly their own food, produced by themselves and for themselves,
not doled out to them by a grudging master. With the worthless parasitical human beings
gone, there was more for everyone to eat. There was more leisure too, inexperienced though
the animals were. They met with many difficulties — for instance, later in the year, when
they harvested the corn, they had to tread it out in the ancient style and blow away the chaff
with their breath, since the farm possessed no threshing machine — but the pigs with their
cleverness and Boxer with his tremendous muscles always pulled them through. Boxer was
the admiration of everybody. He had been a hard worker even in Jones’s time, but now he
seemed more like three horses than one; there were days when the entire work of the farm
seemed to rest on his mighty shoulders. From morning to night he was pushing and pulling,
always at the spot where the work was hardest. He had made an arrangement with one of the
cockerels to call him in the mornings half an hour earlier than anyone else, and would put in
some volunteer labour at whatever seemed to be most needed, before the regular day’s work
began. His answer to every problem, every setback, was “I will work harder!”— which he
had adopted as his personal motto.
But everyone worked according to his capacity. The hens and ducks, for instance, saved five
bushels of corn at the harvest by gathering up the stray grains. Nobody stole, nobody
grumbled over his rations, the quarrelling and biting and jealousy which had been normal
features of life in the old days had almost disappeared. Nobody shirked — or almost nobody.
Mollie, it was true, was not good at getting up in the mornings, and had a way of leaving
work early on the ground that there was a stone in her hoof. And the behaviour of the cat was
somewhat peculiar. It was soon noticed that when there was work to be done the cat could
never be found. She would vanish for hours on end, and then reappear at meal-times, or in the
evening after work was over, as though nothing had happened. But she always made such
excellent excuses, and purred so affectionately, that it was impossible not to believe in her
good intentions. Old Benjamin, the donkey, seemed quite unchanged since the Rebellion. He
did his work in the same slow obstinate way as he had done it in Jones’s time, never shirking
and never volunteering for extra work either. About the Rebellion and its results he would
express no opinion. When asked whether he was not happier now that Jones was gone, he
would say only “Donkeys live a long time. None of you has ever seen a dead donkey,” and
the others had to be content with this cryptic answer.
On Sundays there was no work. Breakfast was an hour later than usual, and after breakfast
there was a ceremony which was observed every week without fail. First came the hoisting of
the flag. Snowball had found in the harness-room an old green tablecloth of Mrs. Jones’s and
had painted on it a hoof and a horn in white. This was run up the flagstaff in the farmhouse
garden every Sunday morning. The flag was green, Snowball explained, to represent the
green fields of England, while the hoof and horn signified the future Republic of the Animals
which would arise when the human race had been finally overthrown. After the hoisting of
the flag all the animals trooped into the big barn for a general assembly which was known as
the Meeting. Here the work of the coming week was planned out and resolutions were put
forward and debated. It was always the pigs who put forward the resolutions. The other
animals understood how to vote, but could never think of any resolutions of their own.
Snowball and Napoleon were by far the most active in the debates. But it was noticed that
these two were never in agreement: whatever suggestion either of them made, the other could
be counted on to oppose it. Even when it was resolved — a thing no one could object to in
itself — to set aside the small paddock behind the orchard as a home of rest for animals who
were past work, there was a stormy debate over the correct retiring age for each class of
animal. The Meeting always ended with the singing of ‘Beasts of England’,and the afternoon
was given up to recreation.
The pigs had set aside the harness-room as a headquarters for themselves. Here, in the
evenings, they studied blacksmithing, carpentering, and other necessary arts from books
which they had brought out of the farmhouse. Snowball also busied himself with organising
the other animals into what he called Animal Committees. He was indefatigable at this. He
formed the Egg Production Committee for the hens, the Clean Tails League for the cows, the
Wild Comrades’Re-education Committee (the object of this was to tame the rats and rabbits),
the Whiter Wool Movement for the sheep, and various others, besides instituting classes in
reading and writing. On the whole, these projects were a failure. The attempt to tame the wild
creatures, for instance, broke down almost immediately. They continued to behave very much
as before, and when treated with generosity, simply took advantage of it. The cat joined the
Re-education Committee and was very active in it for some days. She was seen one day
sitting on a roof and talking to some sparrows who were just out of her reach. She was telling
them that all animals were now comrades and that any sparrow who chose could come and
perch on her paw; but the sparrows kept their distance.
The reading and writing classes, however, were a great success. By the autumn almost every
animal on the farm was literate in some degree.
As for the pigs, they could already read and write perfectly. The dogs learned to read fairly
well, but were not interested in reading anything except the Seven Commandments. Muriel,
the goat, could read somewhat better than the dogs, and sometimes used to read to the others
in the evenings from scraps of newspaper which she found on the rubbish heap. Benjamin
could read as well as any pig, but never exercised his faculty. So far as he knew, he said,
there was nothing worth reading. Clover learnt the whole alphabet, but could not put words
together. Boxer could not get beyond the letter D. He would trace out A, B, C, D, in the dust
with his great hoof, and then would stand staring at the letters with his ears back, sometimes
shaking his forelock, trying with all his might to remember what came next and never
succeeding. On several occasions, indeed, he did learn E, F, G, H, but by the time he knew
them, it was always discovered that he had forgotten A, B, C, and D. Finally he decided to be
content with the first four letters, and used to write them out once or twice every day to
refresh his memory. Mollie refused to learn any but the six letters which spelt her own name.
She would form these very neatly out of pieces of twig, and would then decorate them with a
flower or two and walk round them admiring them.
None of the other animals on the farm could get further than the letter A. It was also found
that the stupider animals, such as the sheep, hens, and ducks, were unable to learn the Seven
Commandments by heart. After much thought Snowball declared that the Seven
Commandments could in effect be reduced to a single maxim, namely: “Four legs good, two
legs bad.” This, he said, contained the essential principle of Animalism. Whoever had
thoroughly grasped it would be safe from human influences. The birds at first objected, since
it seemed to them that they also had two legs, but Snowball proved to them that this was not
so.
“A bird’s wing, comrades,” he said, “is an organ of propulsion and not of manipulation. It
should therefore be regarded as a leg. The distinguishing mark of man is the HAND, the
instrument with which he does all his mischief.”
The birds did not understand Snowball’s long words, but they accepted his explanation, and
all the humbler animals set to work to learn the new maxim by heart. FOUR LEGS GOOD,
TWO LEGS BAD, was inscribed on the end wall of the barn, above the Seven
Commandments and in bigger letters. When they had once got it by heart, the sheep
developed a great liking for this maxim, and often as they lay in the field they would all start
bleating “Four legs good, two legs bad! Four legs good, two legs bad!” and keep it up for
hours on end, never growing tired of it.
Napoleon took no interest in Snowball’s committees. He said that the education of the young
was more important than anything that could be done for those who were already grown up.
It happened that Jessie and Bluebell had both whelped soon after the hay harvest, giving birth
between them to nine sturdy puppies. As soon as they were weaned, Napoleon took them
away from their mothers, saying that he would make himself responsible for their education.
He took them up into a loft which could only be reached by a ladder from the harness-room,
and there kept them in such seclusion that the rest of the farm soon forgot their existence.
The mystery of where the milk went to was soon cleared up. It was mixed every day into the
pigs’ mash. The early apples were now ripening, and the grass of the orchard was littered
with windfalls. The animals had assumed as a matter of course that these would be shared out
equally; one day, however, the order went forth that all the windfalls were to be collected and
brought to the harness-room for the use of the pigs. At this some of the other animals
murmured, but it was no use. All the pigs were in full agreement on this point, even Snowball
and Napoleon. Squealer was sent to make the necessary explanations to the others.
“Comrades!” he cried. “You do not imagine, I hope, that we pigs are doing this in a spirit of
selfishness and privilege? Many of us actually dislike milk and apples. I dislike them myself.
Our sole object in taking these things is to preserve our health. Milk and apples (this has been
proved by Science, comrades) contain substances absolutely necessary to the well-being of a
pig. We pigs are brainworkers. The whole management and organisation of this farm depend
on us. Day and night we are watching over your welfare. It is for YOUR sake that we drink
that milk and eat those apples. Do you know what would happen if we pigs failed in our
duty? Jones would come back! Yes, Jones would come back! Surely, comrades,” cried
Squealer almost pleadingly, skipping from side to side and whisking his tail, “surely there is
no one among you who wants to see Jones come back?”
Now if there was one thing that the animals were completely certain of, it was that they did
not want Jones back. When it was put to them in this light, they had no more to say. The
importance of keeping the pigs in good health was all too obvious. So it was agreed without
further argument that the milk and the windfall apples (and also the main crop of apples when
they ripened) should be reserved for the pigs alone.
By the late summer the news of what had happened on Animal Farm had spread across half
the county. Every day Snowball and Napoleon sent out flights of pigeons whose instructions
were to mingle with the animals on neighbouring farms, tell them the story of the Rebellion,
and teach them the tune of ‘Beasts of England’.
Most of this time Mr. Jones had spent sitting in the taproom of the Red Lion at Willingdon,
complaining to anyone who would listen of the monstrous injustice he had suffered in being
turned out of his property by a pack of good-for-nothing animals. The other farmers
sympathised in principle, but they did not at first give him much help. At heart, each of them
was secretly wondering whether he could not somehow turn Jones’s misfortune to his own
advantage. It was lucky that the owners of the two farms which adjoined Animal Farm were
on permanently bad terms. One of them, which was named Foxwood, was a large, neglected,
old-fashioned farm, much overgrown by woodland, with all its pastures worn out and its
hedges in a disgraceful condition. Its owner, Mr. Pilkington, was an easy-going gentleman
farmer who spent most of his time in fishing or hunting according to the season. The other
farm, which was called Pinchfield, was smaller and better kept. Its owner was a Mr.
Frederick, a tough, shrewd man, perpetually involved in lawsuits and with a name for driving
hard bargains. These two disliked each other so much that it was difficult for them to come to
any agreement, even in defence of their own interests.
Nevertheless, they were both thoroughly frightened by the rebellion on Animal Farm, and
very anxious to prevent their own animals from learning too much about it. At first they
pretended to laugh to scorn the idea of animals managing a farm for themselves. The whole
thing would be over in a fortnight, they said. They put it about that the animals on the Manor
Farm (they insisted on calling it the Manor Farm; they would not tolerate the name “Animal
Farm”)were perpetually fighting among themselves and were also rapidly starving to death.
When time passed and the animals had evidently not starved to death, Frederick and
Pilkington changed their tune and began to talk of the terrible wickedness that now flourished
on Animal Farm. It was given out that the animals there practised cannibalism, tortured one
another with red-hot horseshoes, and had their females in common. This was what came of
rebelling against the laws of Nature, Frederick and Pilkington said.
However, these stories were never fully believed. Rumours of a wonderful farm, where the
human beings had been turned out and the animals managed their own affairs, continued to
circulate in vague and distorted forms, and throughout that year a wave of rebelliousness ran
through the countryside. Bulls which had always been tractable suddenly turned savage,
sheep broke down hedges and devoured the clover, cows kicked the pail over, hunters refused
their fences and shot their riders on to the other side. Above all, the tune and even the words
of ‘Beasts of England’were known everywhere. It had spread with astonishing speed. The
human beings could not contain their rage when they heard this song, though they pretended
to think it merely ridiculous. They could not understand, they said, how even animals could
bring themselves to sing such contemptible rubbish. Any animal caught singing it was given
a flogging on the spot. And yet the song was irrepressible. The blackbirds whistled it in the
hedges, the pigeons cooed it in the elms, it got into the din of the smithies and the tune of the
church bells. And when the human beings listened to it, they secretly trembled, hearing in it a
prophecy of their future doom.
Early in October, when the corn was cut and stacked and some of it was already threshed, a
flight of pigeons came whirling through the air and alighted in the yard of Animal Farm in
the wildest excitement. Jones and all his men, with half a dozen others from Foxwood and
Pinchfield, had entered the five-barred gate and were coming up the cart-track that led to the
farm. They were all carrying sticks, except Jones, who was marching ahead with a gun in his
hands. Obviously they were going to attempt the recapture of the farm.
This had long been expected, and all preparations had been made. Snowball, who had studied
an old book of Julius Caesar’s campaigns which he had found in the farmhouse, was in
charge of the defensive operations. He gave his orders quickly, and in a couple of minutes
every animal was at his post.
As the human beings approached the farm buildings, Snowball launched his first attack. All
the pigeons, to the number of thirty-five, flew to and fro over the men’s heads and muted
upon them from mid-air; and while the men were dealing with this, the geese, who had been
hiding behind the hedge, rushed out and pecked viciously at the calves of their legs.
However, this was only a light skirmishing manoeuvre, intended to create a little disorder,
and the men easily drove the geese off with their sticks. Snowball now launched his second
line of attack. Muriel, Benjamin, and all the sheep, with Snowball at the head of them, rushed
forward and prodded and butted the men from every side, while Benjamin turned around and
lashed at them with his small hoofs. But once again the men, with their sticks and their
hobnailed boots, were too strong for them; and suddenly, at a squeal from Snowball, which
was the signal for retreat, all the animals turned and fled through the gateway into the yard.
The men gave a shout of triumph. They saw, as they imagined, their enemies in flight, and
they rushed after them in disorder. This was just what Snowball had intended. As soon as
they were well inside the yard, the three horses, the three cows, and the rest of the pigs, who
had been lying in ambush in the cowshed, suddenly emerged in their rear, cutting them off.
Snowball now gave the signal for the charge. He himself dashed straight for Jones. Jones saw
him coming, raised his gun and fired. The pellets scored bloody streaks along Snowball’s
back, and a sheep dropped dead. Without halting for an instant, Snowball flung his fifteen
stone against Jones’s legs. Jones was hurled into a pile of dung and his gun flew out of his
hands. But the most terrifying spectacle of all was Boxer, rearing up on his hind legs and
striking out with his great iron-shod hoofs like a stallion. His very first blow took a stable-lad
from Foxwood on the skull and stretched him lifeless in the mud. At the sight, several men
dropped their sticks and tried to run. Panic overtook them, and the next moment all the
animals together were chasing them round and round the yard. They were gored, kicked,
bitten, trampled on. There was not an animal on the farm that did not take vengeance on them
after his own fashion. Even the cat suddenly leapt off a roof onto a cowman’s shoulders and
sank her claws in his neck, at which he yelled horribly. At a moment when the opening was
clear, the men were glad enough to rush out of the yard and make a bolt for the main road.
And so within five minutes of their invasion they were in ignominious retreat by the same
way as they had come, with a flock of geese hissing after them and pecking at their calves all
the way.
All the men were gone except one. Back in the yard Boxer was pawing with his hoof at the
stable-lad who lay face down in the mud, trying to turn him over. The boy did not stir.
“He is dead,” said Boxer sorrowfully. “I had no intention of doing that. I forgot that I was
wearing iron shoes. Who will believe that I did not do this on purpose?”
“No sentimentality, comrade!” cried Snowball from whose wounds the blood was still
dripping. “War is war. The only good human being is a dead one.”
“I have no wish to take life, not even human life,” repeated Boxer, and his eyes were full of
tears.
“Where is Mollie?” exclaimed somebody.
Mollie in fact was missing. For a moment there was great alarm; it was feared that the men
might have harmed her in some way, or even carried her off with them. In the end, however,
she was found hiding in her stall with her head buried among the hay in the manger. She had
taken to flight as soon as the gun went off. And when the others came back from looking for
her, it was to find that the stable-lad, who in fact was only stunned, had already recovered and
made off.
The animals had now reassembled in the wildest excitement, each recounting his own
exploits in the battle at the top of his voice. An impromptu celebration of the victory was held
immediately. The flag was run up and ‘Beasts of England’was sung a number of times, then
the sheep who had been killed was given a solemn funeral, a hawthorn bush being planted on
her grave. At the graveside Snowball made a little speech, emphasising the need for all
animals to be ready to die for Animal Farm if need be.
The animals decided unanimously to create a military decoration, “Animal Hero, First Class,”
which was conferred there and then on Snowball and Boxer. It consisted of a brass medal
(they were really some old horse-brasses which had been found in the harness-room), to be
worn on Sundays and holidays. There was also “Animal Hero, Second Class,” which was
conferred posthumously on the dead sheep.
There was much discussion as to what the battle should be called. In the end, it was named
the Battle of the Cowshed, since that was where the ambush had been sprung. Mr. Jones’s
gun had been found lying in the mud, and it was known that there was a supply of cartridges
in the farmhouse. It was decided to set the gun up at the foot of the Flagstaff, like a piece of
artillery, and to fire it twice a year — once on October the twelfth, the anniversary of the
Battle of the Cowshed, and once on Midsummer Day, the anniversary of the Rebellion.
As winter drew on, Mollie became more and more troublesome. She was late for work every
morning and excused herself by saying that she had overslept, and she complained of
mysterious pains, although her appetite was excellent. On every kind of pretext she would run
away from work and go to the drinking pool, where she would stand foolishly gazing at her
own reflection in the water. But there were also rumours of something more serious. One day,
as Mollie strolled blithely into the yard, flirting her long tail and chewing at a stalk of hay,
Clover took her aside.
“Mollie,” she said, “I have something very serious to say to you. This morning I saw you
looking over the hedge that divides Animal Farm from Foxwood. One of Mr. Pilkington’s
men was standing on the other side of the hedge. And — I was a long way away, but I am
almost certain I saw this — he was talking to you and you were allowing him to stroke your
nose. What does that mean, Mollie?”
“He didn’t! I wasn’t! It isn’t true!” cried Mollie, beginning to prance about and paw the
ground.
“Mollie! Look me in the face. Do you give me your word of honour that that man was not
stroking your nose?”
“It isn’t true!” repeated Mollie, but she could not look Clover in the face, and the next
moment she took to her heels and galloped away into the field.
A thought struck Clover. Without saying anything to the others, she went to Mollie’s stall and
turned over the straw with her hoof. Hidden under the straw was a little pile of lump sugar
and several bunches of ribbon of different colours.
Three days later Mollie disappeared. For some weeks nothing was known of her
whereabouts, then the pigeons reported that they had seen her on the other side of
Willingdon. She was between the shafts of a smart dogcart painted red and black, which was
standing outside a public-house. A fat red-faced man in check breeches and gaiters, who
looked like a publican, was stroking her nose and feeding her with sugar. Her coat was newly
clipped and she wore a scarlet ribbon round her forelock. She appeared to be enjoying
herself, so the pigeons said. None of the animals ever mentioned Mollie again.
In January there came bitterly hard weather. The earth was like iron, and nothing could be
done in the fields. Many meetings were held in the big barn, and the pigs occupied
themselves with planning out the work of the coming season. It had come to be accepted that
the pigs, who were manifestly cleverer than the other animals, should decide all questions of
farm policy, though their decisions had to be ratified by a majority vote. This arrangement
would have worked well enough if it had not been for the disputes between Snowball and
Napoleon. These two disagreed at every point where disagreement was possible. If one of
them suggested sowing a bigger acreage with barley, the other was certain to demand a
bigger acreage of oats, and if one of them said that such and such a field was just right for
cabbages, the other would declare that it was useless for anything except roots. Each had his
own following, and there were some violent debates. At the Meetings Snowball often won
over the majority by his brilliant speeches, but Napoleon was better at canvassing support for
himself in between times. He was especially successful with the sheep. Of late the sheep had
taken to bleating “Four legs good, two legs bad” both in and out of season, and they often
interrupted the Meeting with this. It was noticed that they were especially liable to break into
“Four legs good, two legs bad” at crucial moments in Snowball’s speeches. Snowball had
made a close study of some back numbers of the ‘Farmer and Stockbreeder’ which he had
found in the farmhouse, and was full of plans for innovations and improvements. He talked
learnedly about field drains, silage, and basic slag, and had worked out a complicated scheme
for all the animals to drop their dung directly in the fields, at a different spot every day, to
save the labour of cartage. Napoleon produced no schemes of his own, but said quietly that
Snowball’s would come to nothing, and seemed to be biding his time. But of all their
controversies, none was so bitter as the one that took place over the windmill.
In the long pasture, not far from the farm buildings, there was a small knoll which was the
highest point on the farm. After surveying the ground, Snowball declared that this was just
the place for a windmill, which could be made to operate a dynamo and supply the farm with
electrical power. This would light the stalls and warm them in winter, and would also run a
circular saw, a chaff-cutter, a mangel-slicer, and an electric milking machine. The animals
had never heard of anything of this kind before (for the farm was an old-fashioned one and
had only the most primitive machinery), and they listened in astonishment while Snowball
conjured up pictures of fantastic machines which would do their work for them while they
grazed at their ease in the fields or improved their minds with reading and conversation.
Within a few weeks Snowball’s plans for the windmill were fully worked out. The
mechanical details came mostly from three books which had belonged to Mr. Jones —‘One
Thousand Useful Things to Do About the House’, ‘Every Man His Own Bricklayer’, and
‘Electricity for Beginners’. Snowball used as his study a shed which had once been used for
incubators and had a smooth wooden floor, suitable for drawing on. He was closeted there for
hours at a time. With his books held open by a stone, and with a piece of chalk gripped
between the knuckles of his trotter, he would move rapidly to and fro, drawing in line after
line and uttering little whimpers of excitement. Gradually the plans grew into a complicated
mass of cranks and cog-wheels, covering more than half the floor, which the other animals
found completely unintelligible but very impressive. All of them came to look at Snowball’s
drawings at least once a day. Even the hens and ducks came, and were at pains not to tread on
the chalk marks. Only Napoleon held aloof. He had declared himself against the windmill
from the start. One day, however, he arrived unexpectedly to examine the plans. He walked
heavily round the shed, looked closely at every detail of the plans and snuffed at them once or
twice, then stood for a little while contemplating them out of the corner of his eye; then
suddenly he lifted his leg, urinated over the plans, and walked out without uttering a word.
The whole farm was deeply divided on the subject of the windmill. Snowball did not deny
that to build it would be a difficult business. Stone would have to be carried and built up into
walls, then the sails would have to be made and after that there would be need for dynamos
and cables. (How these were to be procured, Snowball did not say.) But he maintained that it
could all be done in a year. And thereafter, he declared, so much labour would be saved that
the animals would only need to work three days a week. Napoleon, on the other hand, argued
that the great need of the moment was to increase food production, and that if they wasted
time on the windmill they would all starve to death. The animals formed themselves into two
factions under the slogan, “Vote for Snowball and the three-day week” and “Vote for
Napoleon and the full manger.” Benjamin was the only animal who did not side with either
faction. He refused to believe either that food would become more plentiful or that the
windmill would save work. Windmill or no windmill, he said, life would go on as it had
always gone on — that is, badly.
Apart from the disputes over the windmill, there was the question of the defence of the farm.
It was fully realised that though the human beings had been defeated in the Battle of the
Cowshed they might make another and more determined attempt to recapture the farm and
reinstate Mr. Jones. They had all the more reason for doing so because the news of their
defeat had spread across the countryside and made the animals on the neighbouring farms
more restive than ever. As usual, Snowball and Napoleon were in disagreement. According to
Napoleon, what the animals must do was to procure firearms and train themselves in the use
of them. According to Snowball, they must send out more and more pigeons and stir up
rebellion among the animals on the other farms. The one argued that if they could not defend
themselves they were bound to be conquered, the other argued that if rebellions happened
everywhere they would have no need to defend themselves. The animals listened first to
Napoleon, then to Snowball, and could not make up their minds which was right; indeed, they
always found themselves in agreement with the one who was speaking at the moment.
At last the day came when Snowball’s plans were completed. At the Meeting on the
following Sunday the question of whether or not to begin work on the windmill was to be put
to the vote. When the animals had assembled in the big barn, Snowball stood up and, though
occasionally interrupted by bleating from the sheep, set forth his reasons for advocating the
building of the windmill. Then Napoleon stood up to reply. He said very quietly that the
windmill was nonsense and that he advised nobody to vote for it, and promptly sat down
again; he had spoken for barely thirty seconds, and seemed almost indifferent as to the effect
he produced. At this Snowball sprang to his feet, and shouting down the sheep, who had
begun bleating again, broke into a passionate appeal in favour of the windmill. Until now the
animals had been about equally divided in their sympathies, but in a moment Snowball’s
eloquence had carried them away. In glowing sentences he painted a picture of Animal Farm
as it might be when sordid labour was lifted from the animals’ backs. His imagination had
now run far beyond chaff-cutters and turnip-slicers. Electricity, he said, could operate
threshing machines, ploughs, harrows, rollers, and reapers and binders, besides supplying
every stall with its own electric light, hot and cold water, and an electric heater. By the time
he had finished speaking, there was no doubt as to which way the vote would go. But just at
this moment Napoleon stood up and, casting a peculiar sidelong look at Snowball, uttered a
high-pitched whimper of a kind no one had ever heard him utter before.
At this there was a terrible baying sound outside, and nine enormous dogs wearing brassstudded collars came bounding into the barn. They dashed straight for Snowball, who only
sprang from his place just in time to escape their snapping jaws. In a moment he was out of
the door and they were after him. Too amazed and frightened to speak, all the animals
crowded through the door to watch the chase. Snowball was racing across the long pasture
that led to the road. He was running as only a pig can run, but the dogs were close on his
heels. Suddenly he slipped and it seemed certain that they had him. Then he was up again,
running faster than ever, then the dogs were gaining on him again. One of them all but closed
his jaws on Snowball’s tail, but Snowball whisked it free just in time. Then he put on an extra
spurt and, with a few inches to spare, slipped through a hole in the hedge and was seen no
more.
Silent and terrified, the animals crept back into the barn. In a moment the dogs came
bounding back. At first no one had been able to imagine where these creatures came from,
but the problem was soon solved: they were the puppies whom Napoleon had taken away
from their mothers and reared privately. Though not yet full-grown, they were huge dogs, and
as fierce-looking as wolves. They kept close to Napoleon. It was noticed that they wagged
their tails to him in the same way as the other dogs had been used to do to Mr. Jones.
Napoleon, with the dogs following him, now mounted on to the raised portion of the floor
where Major had previously stood to deliver his speech. He announced that from now on the
Sunday-morning Meetings would come to an end. They were unnecessary, he said, and
wasted time. In future all questions relating to the working of the farm would be settled by a
special committee of pigs, presided over by himself. These would meet in private and
afterwards communicate their decisions to the others. The animals would still assemble on
Sunday mornings to salute the flag, sing ‘Beasts of England’, and receive their orders for the
week; but there would be no more debates.
In spite of the shock that Snowball’s expulsion had given them, the animals were dismayed
by this announcement. Several of them would have protested if they could have found the
right arguments. Even Boxer was vaguely troubled. He set his ears back, shook his forelock
several times, and tried hard to marshal his thoughts; but in the end he could not think of
anything to say. Some of the pigs themselves, however, were more articulate. Four young
porkers in the front row uttered shrill squeals of disapproval, and all four of them sprang to
their feet and began speaking at once. But suddenly the dogs sitting round Napoleon let out
deep, menacing growls, and the pigs fell silent and sat down again. Then the sheep broke out
into a tremendous bleating of “Four legs good, two legs bad!” which went on for nearly a
quarter of an hour and put an end to any chance of discussion.
Afterwards Squealer was sent round the farm to explain the new arrangement to the others.
“Comrades,” he said, “I trust that every animal here appreciates the sacrifice that Comrade
Napoleon has made in taking this extra labour upon himself. Do not imagine, comrades, that
leadership is a pleasure! On the contrary, it is a deep and heavy responsibility. No one
believes more firmly than Comrade Napoleon that all animals are equal. He would be only
too happy to let you make your decisions for yourselves. But sometimes you might make the
wrong decisions, comrades, and then where should we be? Suppose you had decided to
follow Snowball, with his moonshine of windmills —Snowball, who, as we now know, was
no better than a criminal?”
“He fought bravely at the Battle of the Cowshed,” said somebody.
“Bravery is not enough,” said Squealer. “Loyalty and obedience are more important. And as
to the Battle of the Cowshed, I believe the time will come when we shall find that Snowball’s
part in it was much exaggerated. Discipline, comrades, iron discipline! That is the watchword
for today. One false step, and our enemies would be upon us. Surely, comrades, you do not
want Jones back?”
Once again this argument was unanswerable. Certainly the animals did not want Jones back;
if the holding of debates on Sunday mornings was liable to bring him back, then the debates
must stop. Boxer, who had now had time to think things over, voiced the general feeling by
saying: “If Comrade Napoleon says it, it must be right.” And from then on he adopted the
maxim, “Napoleon is always right,” in addition to his private motto of “I will work harder.”
By this time the weather had broken and the spring ploughing had begun. The shed where
Snowball had drawn his plans of the windmill had been shut up and it was assumed that the
plans had been rubbed off the floor. Every Sunday morning at ten o’clock the animals
assembled in the big barn to receive their orders for the week. The skull of old Major, now
clean of flesh, had been disinterred from the orchard and set up on a stump at the foot of the
flagstaff, beside the gun. After the hoisting of the flag, the animals were required to file past
the skull in a reverent manner before entering the barn. Nowadays they did not sit all together
as they had done in the past. Napoleon, with Squealer and another pig named Minimus, who
had a remarkable gift for composing songs and poems, sat on the front of the raised platform,
with the nine young dogs forming a semicircle round them, and the other pigs sitting behind.
The rest of the animals sat facing them in the main body of the barn. Napoleon read out the
orders for the week in a gruff soldierly style, and after a single singing of ‘Beasts of
England’, all the animals dispersed.
On the third Sunday after Snowball’s expulsion, the animals were somewhat surprised to hear
Napoleon announce that the windmill was to be built after all. He did not give any reason for
having changed his mind, but merely warned the animals that this extra task would mean very
hard work, it might even be necessary to reduce their rations. The plans, however, had all
been prepared, down to the last detail. A special committee of pigs had been at work upon
them for the past three weeks. The building of the windmill, with various other
improvements, was expected to take two years.
That evening Squealer explained privately to the other animals that Napoleon had never in
reality been opposed to the windmill. On the contrary, it was he who had advocated it in the
beginning, and the plan which Snowball had drawn on the floor of the incubator shed had
actually been stolen from among Napoleon’s papers. The windmill was, in fact, Napoleon’s
own creation. Why, then, asked somebody, had he spoken so strongly against it? Here
Squealer looked very sly. That, he said, was Comrade Napoleon’s cunning. He had SEEMED
to oppose the windmill, simply as a manoeuvre to get rid of Snowball, who was a dangerous
character and a bad influence. Now that Snowball was out of the way, the plan could go
forward without his interference. This, said Squealer, was something called tactics. He
repeated a number of times, “Tactics, comrades, tactics!” skipping round and whisking his
tail with a merry laugh. The animals were not certain what the word meant, but Squealer
spoke so persuasively, and the three dogs who happened to be with him growled so
threateningly, that they accepted his explanation without further questions.
All that year the animals worked like slaves. But they were happy in their work; they grudged
no effort or sacrifice, well aware that everything that they did was for the benefit of
themselves and those of their kind who would come after them, and not for a pack of idle,
thieving human beings.
Throughout the spring and summer they worked a sixty-hour week, and in August Napoleon
announced that there would be work on Sunday afternoons as well. This work was strictly
voluntary, but any animal who absented himself from it would have his rations reduced by
half. Even so, it was found necessary to leave certain tasks undone. The harvest was a little
less successful than in the previous year, and two fields which should have been sown with
roots in the early summer were not sown because the ploughing had not been completed early
enough. It was possible to foresee that the coming winter would be a hard one.
The windmill presented unexpected difficulties. There was a good quarry of limestone on the
farm, and plenty of sand and cement had been found in one of the outhouses, so that all the
materials for building were at hand. But the problem the animals could not at first solve was
how to break up the stone into pieces of suitable size. There seemed no way of doing this
except with picks and crowbars, which no animal could use, because no animal could stand
on his hind legs. Only after weeks of vain effort did the right idea occur to somebody-namely,
to utilise the force of gravity. Huge boulders, far too big to be used as they were, were lying
all over the bed of the quarry. The animals lashed ropes round these, and then all together,
cows, horses, sheep, any animal that could lay hold of the rope — even the pigs sometimes
joined in at critical moments — they dragged them with desperate slowness up the slope to
the top of the quarry, where they were toppled over the edge, to shatter to pieces below.
Transporting the stone when it was once broken was comparatively simple. The horses
carried it off in cart-loads, the sheep dragged single blocks, even Muriel and Benjamin yoked
themselves into an old governess-cart and did their share. By late summer a sufficient store of
stone had accumulated, and then the building began, under the superintendence of the pigs.
But it was a slow, laborious process. Frequently it took a whole day of exhausting effort to
drag a single boulder to the top of the quarry, and sometimes when it was pushed over the
edge it failed to break. Nothing could have been achieved without Boxer, whose strength
seemed equal to that of all the rest of the animals put together. When the boulder began to
slip and the animals cried out in despair at finding themselves dragged down the hill, it was
always Boxer who strained himself against the rope and brought the boulder to a stop. To see
him toiling up the slope inch by inch, his breath coming fast, the tips of his hoofs clawing at
the ground, and his great sides matted with sweat, filled everyone with admiration. Clover
warned him sometimes to be careful not to overstrain himself, but Boxer would never listen
to her. His two slogans, “I will work harder” and “Napoleon is always right,” seemed to him
a sufficient answer to all problems. He had made arrangements with the cockerel to call him
three-quarters of an hour earlier in the mornings instead of half an hour. And in his spare
moments, of which there were not many nowadays, he would go alone to the quarry, collect a
load of broken stone, and drag it down to the site of the windmill unassisted.
The animals were not badly off throughout that summer, in spite of the hardness of their
work. If they had no more food than they had had in Jones’s day, at least they did not have
less. The advantage of only having to feed themselves, and not having to support five
extravagant human beings as well, was so great that it would have taken a lot of failures to
outweigh it. And in many ways the animal method of doing things was more efficient and
saved labour. Such jobs as weeding, for instance, could be done with a thoroughness
impossible to human beings. And again, since no animal now stole, it was unnecessary to
fence off pasture from arable land, which saved a lot of labour on the upkeep of hedges and
gates. Nevertheless, as the summer wore on, various unforeseen shortages began to make
them selves felt. There was need of paraffin oil, nails, string, dog biscuits, and iron for the
horses’ shoes, none of which could be produced on the farm. Later there would also be need
for seeds and artificial manures, besides various tools and, finally, the machinery for the
windmill. How these were to be procured, no one was able to imagine.
One Sunday morning, when the animals assembled to receive their orders, Napoleon
announced that he had decided upon a new policy. From now onwards Animal Farm would
engage in trade with the neighbouring farms: not, of course, for any commercial purpose, but
simply in order to obtain certain materials which were urgently necessary. The needs of the
windmill must override everything else, he said. He was therefore making arrangements to
sell a stack of hay and part of the current year’s wheat crop, and later on, if more money were
needed, it would have to be made up by the sale of eggs, for which there was always a market
in Willingdon. The hens, said Napoleon, should welcome this sacrifice as their own special
contribution towards the building of the windmill.
Once again the animals were conscious of a vague uneasiness. Never to have any dealings
with human beings, never to engage in trade, never to make use of money — had not these
been among the earliest resolutions passed at that first triumphant Meeting after Jones was
expelled? All the animals remembered passing such resolutions: or at least they thought that
they remembered it. The four young pigs who had protested when Napoleon abolished the
Meetings raised their voices timidly, but they were promptly silenced by a tremendous
growling from the dogs. Then, as usual, the sheep broke into “Four legs good, two legs bad!”
and the momentary awkwardness was smoothed over. Finally Napoleon raised his trotter for
silence and announced that he had already made all the arrangements. There would be no
need for any of the animals to come in contact with human beings, which would clearly be
most undesirable. He intended to take the whole burden upon his own shoulders. A Mr.
Whymper, a solicitor living in Willingdon, had agreed to act as intermediary between Animal
Farm and the outside world, and would visit the farm every Monday morning to receive his
instructions. Napoleon ended his speech with his usual cry of “Long live Animal Farm!” and
after the singing of ‘Beasts of England’the animals were dismissed.
Afterwards Squealer made a round of the farm and set the animals’ minds at rest. He assured
them that the resolution against engaging in trade and using money had never been passed, or
even suggested. It was pure imagination, probably traceable in the beginning to lies circulated
by Snowball. A few animals still felt faintly doubtful, but Squealer asked them shrewdly,
“Are you certain that this is not something that you have dreamed, comrades? Have you any
record of such a resolution? Is it written down anywhere?” And since it was certainly true
that nothing of the kind existed in writing, the animals were satisfied that they had been
mistaken.
Every Monday Mr. Whymper visited the farm as had been arranged. He was a sly-looking
little man with side whiskers, a solicitor in a very small way of business, but sharp enough to
have realised earlier than anyone else that Animal Farm would need a broker and that the
commissions would be worth having. The animals watched his coming and going with a kind
of dread, and avoided him as much as possible. Nevertheless, the sight of Napoleon, on all
fours, delivering orders to Whymper, who stood on two legs, roused their pride and partly
reconciled them to the new arrangement. Their relations with the human race were now not
quite the same as they had been before. The human beings did not hate Animal Farm any less
now that it was prospering; indeed, they hated it more than ever. Every human being held it
as an article of faith that the farm would go bankrupt sooner or later, and, above all, that the
windmill would be a failure. They would meet in the public-houses and prove to one another
by means of diagrams that the windmill was bound to fall down, or that if it did stand up,
then that it would never work. And yet, against their will, they had developed a certain
respect for the efficiency with which the animals were managing their own affairs. One
symptom of this was that they had begun to call Animal Farm by its proper name and ceased
to pretend that it was called the Manor Farm. They had also dropped their championship of
Jones, who had given up hope of getting his farm back and gone to live in another part of the
county. Except through Whymper, there was as yet no contact between Animal Farm and the
outside world, but there were constant rumours that Napoleon was about to enter into a
definite business agreement either with Mr. Pilkington of Foxwood or with Mr. Frederick of
Pinchfield — but never, it was noticed, with both simultaneously.
It was about this time that the pigs suddenly moved into the farmhouse and took up their
residence there. Again the animals seemed to remember that a resolution against this had
been passed in the early days, and again Squealer was able to convince them that this was not
the case. It was absolutely necessary, he said, that the pigs, who were the brains of the farm,
should have a quiet place to work in. It was also more suited to the dignity of the Leader (for
of late he had taken to speaking of Napoleon under the title of “Leader”) to live in a house
than in a mere sty. Nevertheless, some of the animals were disturbed when they heard that the
pigs not only took their meals in the kitchen and used the drawing-room as a recreation room,
but also slept in the beds. Boxer passed it off as usual with “Napoleon is always right!”, but
Clover, who thought she remembered a definite ruling against beds, went to the end of the
barn and tried to puzzle out the Seven Commandments which were inscribed there. Finding
herself unable to read more than individual letters, she fetched Muriel.
“Muriel,” she said, “read me the Fourth Commandment. Does it not say something about
never sleeping in a bed?”
With some difficulty Muriel spelt it out.
“It says, ‘No animal shall sleep in a bed with sheets,”’ she announced finally.
Curiously enough, Clover had not remembered that the Fourth Commandment mentioned
sheets; but as it was there on the wall, it must have done so. And Squealer, who happened to
be passing at this moment, attended by two or three dogs, was able to put the whole matter in
its proper perspective.
“You have heard then, comrades,” he said, “that we pigs now sleep in the beds of the
farmhouse? And why not? You did not suppose, surely, that there was ever a ruling against
beds? A bed merely means a place to sleep in. A pile of straw in a stall is a bed, properly
regarded. The rule was against sheets, which are a human invention. We have removed the
sheets from the farmhouse beds, and sleep between blankets. And very comfortable beds they
are too! But not more comfortable than we need, I can tell you, comrades, with all the
brainwork we have to do nowadays. You would not rob us of our repose, would you,
comrades? You would not have us too tired to carry out our duties? Surely none of you
wishes to see Jones back?”
The animals reassured him on this point immediately, and no more was said about the pigs
sleeping in the farmhouse beds. And when, some days afterwards, it was announced that from
now on the pigs would get up an hour later in the mornings than the other animals, no
complaint was made about that either.
By the autumn the animals were tired but happy. They had had a hard year, and after the sale
of part of the hay and corn, the stores of food for the winter were none too plentiful, but the
windmill compensated for everything. It was almost half built now. After the harvest there
was a stretch of clear dry weather, and the animals toiled harder than ever, thinking it well
worth while to plod to and fro all day with blocks of stone if by doing so they could raise the
walls another foot. Boxer would even come out at nights and work for an hour or two on his
own by the light of the harvest moon. In their spare moments the animals would walk round
and round the half-finished mill, admiring the strength and perpendicularity of its walls and
marvelling that they should ever have been able to build anything so imposing. Only old
Benjamin refused to grow enthusiastic about the windmill, though, as usual, he would utter
nothing beyond the cryptic remark that donkeys live a long time.
November came, with raging south-west winds. Building had to stop because it was now too
wet to mix the cement. Finally there came a night when the gale was so violent that the farm
buildings rocked on their foundations and several tiles were blown off the roof of the barn.
The hens woke up squawking with terror because they had all dreamed simultaneously of
hearing a gun go off in the distance. In the morning the animals came out of their stalls to
find that the flagstaff had been blown down and an elm tree at the foot of the orchard had
been plucked up like a radish. They had just noticed this when a cry of despair broke from
every animal’s throat. A terrible sight had met their eyes. The windmill was in ruins.
With one accord they dashed down to the spot. Napoleon, who seldom moved out of a walk,
raced ahead of them all. Yes, there it lay, the fruit of all their struggles, levelled to its
foundations, the stones they had broken and carried so laboriously scattered all around.
Unable at first to speak, they stood gazing mournfully at the litter of fallen stone. Napoleon
paced to and fro in silence, occasionally snuffing at the ground. His tail had grown rigid and
twitched sharply from side to side, a sign in him of intense mental activity. Suddenly he
halted as though his mind were made up.
“Comrades,” he said quietly, “do you know who is responsible for this? Do you know the
enemy who has come in the night and overthrown our windmill? SNOWBALL!” he suddenly
roared in a voice of thunder. “Snowball has done this thing! In sheer malignity, thinking to
set back our plans and avenge himself for his ignominious expulsion, this traitor has crept
here under cover of night and destroyed our work of nearly a year. Comrades, here and now I
pronounce the death sentence upon Snowball. ‘Animal Hero, Second Class,’ and half a
bushel of apples to any animal who brings him to justice. A full bushel to anyone who
captures him alive!”
The animals were shocked beyond measure to learn that even Snowball could be guilty of
such an action. There was a cry of indignation, and everyone began thinking out ways of
catching Snowball if he should ever come back. Almost immediately the footprints of a pig
were discovered in the grass at a little distance from the knoll. They could only be traced for
a few yards, but appeared to lead to a hole in the hedge. Napoleon snuffed deeply at them and
pronounced them to be Snowball’s. He gave it as his opinion that Snowball had probably
come from the direction of Foxwood Farm.
“No more delays, comrades!” cried Napoleon when the footprints had been examined. “There
is work to be done. This very morning we begin rebuilding the windmill, and we will build
all through the winter, rain or shine. We will teach this miserable traitor that he cannot undo
our work so easily. Remember, comrades, there must be no alteration in our plans: they shall
be carried out to the day. Forward, comrades! Long live the windmill! Long live Animal
Farm!”
It was a bitter winter. The stormy weather was followed by sleet and snow, and then by a
hard frost which did not break till well into February. The animals carried on as best they
could with the rebuilding of the windmill, well knowing that the outside world was watching
them and that the envious human beings would rejoice and triumph if the mill were not
finished on time.
Out of spite, the human beings pretended not to believe that it was Snowball who had
destroyer the windmill: they said that it had fallen down because the walls were too thin. The
animals knew that this was not the case. Still, it had been decided to build the walls three feet
thick this time instead of eighteen inches as before, which meant collecting much larger
quantities of stone. For a long time the quarry was full of snowdrifts and nothing could be
done. Some progress was made in the dry frosty weather that followed, but it was cruel work,
and the animals could not feel so hopeful about it as they had felt before. They were always
cold, and usually hungry as well. Only Boxer and Clover never lost heart. Squealer made
excellent speeches on the joy of service and the dignity of labour, but the other animals found
more inspiration in Boxer’s strength and his never-failing cry of “I will work harder!”
In January food fell short. The corn ration was drastically reduced, and it was announced that
an extra potato ration would be issued to make up for it. Then it was discovered that the
greater part of the potato crop had been frosted in the clamps, which had not been covered
thickly enough. The potatoes had become soft and discoloured, and only a few were edible.
For days at a time the animals had nothing to eat but chaff and mangels. Starvation seemed to
stare them in the face.
It was vitally necessary to conceal this fact from the outside world. Emboldened by the
collapse of the windmill, the human beings were inventing fresh lies about Animal Farm.
Once again it was being put about that all the animals were dying of famine and disease, and
that they were continually fighting among themselves and had resorted to cannibalism and
infanticide. Napoleon was well aware of the bad results that might follow if the real facts of
the food situation were known, and he decided to make use of Mr. Whymper to spread a
contrary impression. Hitherto the animals had had little or no contact with Whymper on his
weekly visits: now, however, a few selected animals, mostly sheep, were instructed to remark
casually in his hearing that rations had been increased. In addition, Napoleon ordered the
almost empty bins in the store-shed to be filled nearly to the brim with sand, which was then
covered up with what remained of the grain and meal. On some suitable pretext Whymper
was led through the store-shed and allowed to catch a glimpse of the bins. He was deceived,
and continued to report to the outside world that there was no food shortage on Animal Farm.
Nevertheless, towards the end of January it became obvious that it would be necessary to
procure some more grain from somewhere. In these days Napoleon rarely appeared in public,
but spent all his time in the farmhouse, which was guarded at each door by fierce-looking
dogs. When he did emerge, it was in a ceremonial manner, with an escort of six dogs who
closely surrounded him and growled if anyone came too near. Frequently he did not even
appear on Sunday mornings, but issued his orders through one of the other pigs, usually
Squealer.
One Sunday morning Squealer announced that the hens, who had just come in to lay again,
must surrender their eggs. Napoleon had accepted, through Whymper, a contract for four
hundred eggs a week. The price of these would pay for enough grain and meal to keep the
farm going till summer came on and conditions were easier.
When the hens heard this, they raised a terrible outcry. They had been warned earlier that this
sacrifice might be necessary, but had not believed that it would really happen. They were just
getting their clutches ready for the spring sitting, and they protested that to take the eggs
away now was murder. For the first time since the expulsion of Jones, there was something
resembling a rebellion. Led by three young Black Minorca pullets, the hens made a
determined effort to thwart Napoleon’s wishes. Their method was to fly up to the rafters and
there lay their eggs, which smashed to pieces on the floor. Napoleon acted swiftly and
ruthlessly. He ordered the hens’ rations to be stopped, and decreed that any animal giving so
much as a grain of corn to a hen should be punished by death. The dogs saw to it that these
orders were carried out. For five days the hens held out, then they capitulated and went back
to their nesting boxes. Nine hens had died in the meantime. Their bodies were buried in the
orchard, and it was given out that they had died of coccidiosis. Whymper heard nothing of
this affair, and the eggs were duly delivered, a grocer’s van driving up to the farm once a
week to take them away.
All this while no more had been seen of Snowball. He was rumoured to be hiding on one of
the neighbouring farms, either Foxwood or Pinchfield. Napoleon was by this time on slightly
better terms with the other farmers than before. It happened that there was in the yard a pile
of timber which had been stacked there ten years earlier when a beech spinney was cleared. It
was well seasoned, and Whymper had advised Napoleon to sell it; both Mr. Pilkington and
Mr. Frederick were anxious to buy it. Napoleon was hesitating between the two, unable to
make up his mind. It was noticed that whenever he seemed on the point of coming to an
agreement with Frederick, Snowball was declared to be in hiding at Foxwood, while, when
he inclined toward Pilkington, Snowball was said to be at Pinchfield.
Suddenly, early in the spring, an alarming thing was discovered. Snowball was secretly
frequenting the farm by night! The animals were so disturbed that they could hardly sleep in
their stalls. Every night, it was said, he came creeping in under cover of darkness and
performed all kinds of mischief. He stole the corn, he upset the milk-pails, he broke the eggs,
he trampled the seedbeds, he gnawed the bark off the fruit trees. Whenever anything went
wrong it became usual to attribute it to Snowball. If a window was broken or a drain was
blocked up, someone was certain to say that Snowball had come in the night and done it, and
when the key of the store-shed was lost, the whole farm was convinced that Snowball had
thrown it down the well. Curiously enough, they went on believing this even after the mislaid
key was found under a sack of meal. The cows declared unanimously that Snowball crept into
their stalls and milked them in their sleep. The rats, which had been troublesome that winter,
were also said to be in league with Snowball.
Napoleon decreed that there should be a full investigation into Snowball’s activities. With his
dogs in attendance he set out and made a careful tour of inspection of the farm buildings, the
other animals following at a respectful distance. At every few steps Napoleon stopped and
snuffed the ground for traces of Snowball’s footsteps, which, he said, he could detect by the
smell. He snuffed in every corner, in the barn, in the cow-shed, in the henhouses, in the
vegetable garden, and found traces of Snowball almost everywhere. He would put his snout
to the ground, give several deep sniffs, ad exclaim in a terrible voice, “Snowball! He has been
here! I can smell him distinctly!” and at the word“Snowball” all the dogs let out bloodcurdling growls and showed their side teeth.
The animals were thoroughly frightened. It seemed to them as though Snowball were some
kind of invisible influence, pervading the air about them and menacing them with all kinds of
dangers. In the evening Squealer called them together, and with an alarmed expression on his
face told them that he had some serious news to report.
“Comrades!” cried Squealer, making little nervous skips, “a most terrible thing has been
discovered. Snowball has sold himself to Frederick of Pinchfield Farm, who is even now
plotting to attack us and take our farm away from us! Snowball is to act as his guide when the
attack begins. But there is worse than that. We had thought that Snowball’s rebellion was
caused simply by his vanity and ambition. But we were wrong, comrades. Do you know what
the real reason was? Snowball was in league with Jones from the very start! He was Jones’s
secret agent all the time. It has all been proved by documents which he left behind him and
which we have only just discovered. To my mind this explains a great deal, comrades. Did
we not see for ourselves how he attempted — fortunately without success — to get us
defeated and destroyed at the Battle of the Cowshed?”
The animals were stupefied. This was a wickedness far outdoing Snowball’s destruction of
the windmill. But it was some minutes before they could fully take it in. They all
remembered, or thought they remembered, how they had seen Snowball charging ahead of
them at the Battle of the Cowshed, how he had rallied and encouraged them at every turn, and
how he had not paused for an instant even when the pellets from Jones’s gun had wounded
his back. At first it was a little difficult to see how this fitted in with his being on Jones’s side.
Even Boxer, who seldom asked questions, was puzzled. He lay down, tucked his fore hoofs
beneath him, shut his eyes, and with a hard effort managed to formulate his thoughts.
“I do not believe that,” he said. “Snowball fought bravely at the Battle of the Cowshed. I saw
him myself. Did we not give him ‘Animal Hero, first Class,’ immediately afterwards?”
“That was our mistake, comrade. For we know now — it is all written down in the secret
documents that we have found— that in reality he was trying to lure us to our doom.”
“But he was wounded,” said Boxer. “We all saw him running with blood.”
“That was part of the arrangement!” cried Squealer. “Jones’s shot only grazed him. I could
show you this in his own writing, if you were able to read it. The plot was for Snowball, at
the critical moment, to give the signal for flight and leave the field to the enemy. And he very
nearly succeeded — I will even say, comrades, he WOULD have succeeded if it had not been
for our heroic Leader, Comrade Napoleon. Do you not remember how, just at the moment
when Jones and his men had got inside the yard, Snowball suddenly turned and fled, and
many animals followed him? And do you not remember, too, that it was just at that moment,
when panic was spreading and all seemed lost, that Comrade Napoleon sprang forward with a
cry of ‘Death to Humanity!’ and sank his teeth in Jones’s leg? Surely you remember THAT,
comrades?”exclaimed Squealer, frisking from side to side.
Now when Squealer described the scene so graphically, it seemed to the animals that they did
remember it. At any rate, they remembered that at the critical moment of the battle Snowball
had turned to flee. But Boxer was still a little uneasy.
“I do not believe that Snowball was a traitor at the beginning,” he said finally. “What he has
done since is different. But I believe that at the Battle of the Cowshed he was a good
comrade.”
“Our Leader, Comrade Napoleon,” announced Squealer, speaking very slowly and firmly,
“has stated categorically —categorically, comrade — that Snowball was Jones’s agent from
the very beginning — yes, and from long before the Rebellion was ever thought of.”
“Ah, that is different!” said Boxer. “If Comrade Napoleon says it, it must be right.”
“That is the true spirit, comrade!” cried Squealer, but it was noticed he cast a very ugly look
at Boxer with his little twinkling eyes. He turned to go, then paused and added impressively:
“I warn every animal on this farm to keep his eyes very wide open. For we have reason to
think that some of Snowball’s secret agents are lurking among us at this moment!”
Four days later, in the late afternoon, Napoleon ordered all the animals to assemble in the
yard. When they were all gathered together, Napoleon emerged from the farmhouse, wearing
both his medals (for he had recently awarded himself“Animal Hero, First Class”, and
“Animal Hero, Second Class”), with his nine huge dogs frisking round him and uttering
growls that sent shivers down all the animals’ spines. They all cowered silently in their
places, seeming to know in advance that some terrible thing was about to happen.
Napoleon stood sternly surveying his audience; then he uttered a high-pitched whimper.
Immediately the dogs bounded forward, seized four of the pigs by the ear and dragged them,
squealing with pain and terror, to Napoleon’s feet. The pigs’ ears were bleeding, the dogs had
tasted blood, and for a few moments they appeared to go quite mad. To the amazement of
everybody, three of them flung themselves upon Boxer. Boxer saw them coming and put out
his great hoof, caught a dog in mid-air, and pinned him to the ground. The dog shrieked for
mercy and the other two fled with their tails between their legs. Boxer looked at Napoleon to
know whether he should crush the dog to death or let it go. Napoleon appeared to change
countenance, and sharply ordered Boxer to let the dog go, whereat Boxer lifted his hoof, and
the dog slunk away, bruised and howling.
Presently the tumult died down. The four pigs waited, trembling, with guilt written on every
line of their countenances. Napoleon now called upon them to confess their crimes. They
were the same four pigs as had protested when Napoleon abolished the Sunday Meetings.
Without any further prompting they confessed that they had been secretly in touch with
Snowball ever since his expulsion, that they had collaborated with him in destroying the
windmill, and that they had entered into an agreement with him to hand over Animal Farm to
Mr. Frederick. They added that Snowball had privately admitted to them that he had been
Jones’s secret agent for years past. When they had finished their confession, the dogs
promptly tore their throats out, and in a terrible voice Napoleon demanded whether any other
animal had anything to confess.
The three hens who had been the ringleaders in the attempted rebellion over the eggs now
came forward and stated that Snowball had appeared to them in a dream and incited them to
disobey Napoleon’s orders. They, too, were slaughtered. Then a goose came forward and
confessed to having secreted six ears of corn during the last year’s harvest and eaten them in
the night. Then a sheep confessed to having urinated in the drinking pool — urged to do this,
so she said, by Snowball — and two other sheep confessed to having murdered an old ram,
an especially devoted follower of Napoleon, by chasing him round and round a bonfire when
he was suffering from a cough. They were all slain on the spot. And so the tale of confessions
and executions went on, until there was a pile of corpses lying before Napoleon’s feet and the
air was heavy with the smell of blood, which had been unknown there since the expulsion of
Jones.
When it was all over, the remaining animals, except for the pigs and dogs, crept away in a
body. They were shaken and miserable. They did not know which was more shocking — the
treachery of the animals who had leagued themselves with Snowball, or the cruel retribution
they had just witnessed. In the old days there had often been scenes of bloodshed equally
terrible, but it seemed to all of them that it was far worse now that it was happening among
themselves. Since Jones had left the farm, until today, no animal had killed another animal.
Not even a rat had been killed. They had made their way on to the little knoll where the halffinished windmill stood, and with one accord they all lay down as though huddling together
for warmth — Clover, Muriel, Benjamin, the cows, the sheep, and a whole flock of geese and
hens — everyone, indeed, except the cat, who had suddenly disappeared just before Napoleon
ordered the animals to assemble. For some time nobody spoke. Only Boxer remained on his
feet. He fidgeted to and fro, swishing his long black tail against his sides and occasionally
uttering a little whinny of surprise. Finally he said:
“I do not understand it. I would not have believed that such things could happen on our farm.
It must be due to some fault in ourselves. The solution, as I see it, is to work harder. From
now onwards I shall get up a full hour earlier in the mornings.”
And he moved off at his lumbering trot and made for the quarry. Having got there, he
collected two successive loads of stone and dragged them down to the windmill before
retiring for the night.
The animals huddled about Clover, not speaking. The knoll where they were lying gave them
a wide prospect across the countryside. Most of Animal Farm was within their view — the
long pasture stretching down to the main road, the hayfield, the spinney, the drinking pool,
the ploughed fields where the young wheat was thick and green, and the red roofs of the farm
buildings with the smoke curling from the chimneys. It was a clear spring evening. The grass
and the bursting hedges were gilded by the level rays of the sun. Never had the farm — and
with a kind of surprise they remembered that it was their own farm, every inch of it their own
property — appeared to the animals so desirable a place. As Clover looked down the hillside
her eyes filled with tears. If she could have spoken her thoughts, it would have been to say
that this was not what they had aimed at when they had set themselves years ago to work for
the overthrow of the human race. These scenes of terror and slaughter were not what they had
looked forward to on that night when old Major first stirred them to rebellion. If she herself
had had any picture of the future, it had been of a society of animals set free from hunger and
the whip, all equal, each working according to his capacity, the strong protecting the weak, as
she had protected the lost brood of ducklings with her foreleg on the night of Major’s speech.
Instead — she did not know why — they had come to a time when no one dared speak his
mind, when fierce, growling dogs roamed everywhere, and when you had to watch your
comrades torn to pieces after confessing to shocking crimes. There was no thought of
rebellion or disobedience in her mind. She knew that, even as things were, they were far
better off than they had been in the days of Jones, and that before all else it was needful to
prevent the return of the human beings. Whatever happened she would remain faithful, work
hard, carry out the orders that were given to her, and accept the leadership of Napoleon. But
still, it was not for this that she and all the other animals had hoped and toiled. It was not for
this that they had built the windmill and faced the bullets of Jones’s gun. Such were her
thoughts, though she lacked the words to express them.
At last, feeling this to be in some way a substitute for the words she was unable to find, she
began to sing ‘Beasts of England’. The other animals sitting round her took it up, and they
sang it three times over — very tunefully, but slowly and mournfully, in a way they had
never sung it before.
They had just finished singing it for the third time when Squealer, attended by two dogs,
approached them with the air of having something important to say. He announced that, by a
special decree of Comrade Napoleon, ‘Beasts of England’ had been abolished. From now
onwards it was forbidden to sing it.
The animals were taken aback.
“Why?” cried Muriel.
“It’s no longer needed, comrade,” said Squealer stiffly. “‘Beasts of England’ was the song of
the Rebellion. But the Rebellion is now completed. The execution of the traitors this
afternoon was the final act. The enemy both external and internal has been defeated. In
‘Beasts of England’ we expressed our longing for a better society in days to come. But that
society has now been established. Clearly this song has no longer any purpose.”
Frightened though they were, some of the animals might possibly have protested, but at this
moment the sheep set up their usual bleating of “Four legs good, two legs bad,” which went
on for several minutes and put an end to the discussion.
So ‘Beasts of England’ was heard no more. In its place Minimus, the poet, had composed
another song which began:
Animal Farm, Animal Farm,
Never through me shalt thou come to harm!
and this was sung every Sunday morning after the hoisting of the flag. But somehow neither
the words nor the tune ever seemed to the animals to come up to ‘Beasts of England’.
A few days later, when the terror caused by the executions had died down, some of the
animals remembered — or thought they remembered — that the Sixth Commandment
decreed “No animal shall kill any other animal.”And though no one cared to mention it in the
hearing of the pigs or the dogs, it was felt that the killings which had taken place did not
square with this. Clover asked Benjamin to read her the Sixth Commandment, and when
Benjamin, as usual, said that he refused to meddle in such matters, she fetched Muriel. Muriel
read the Commandment for her. It ran:“No animal shall kill any other animal WITHOUT
CAUSE.” Somehow or other, the last two words had slipped out of the animals’ memory. But
they saw now that the Commandment had not been violated; for clearly there was good
reason for killing the traitors who had leagued themselves with Snowball.
Throughout the year the animals worked even harder than they had worked in the previous
year. To rebuild the windmill, with walls twice as thick as before, and to finish it by the
appointed date, together with the regular work of the farm, was a tremendous labour. There
were times when it seemed to the animals that they worked longer hours and fed no better
than they had done in Jones’s day. On Sunday mornings Squealer, holding down a long strip
of paper with his trotter, would read out to them lists of figures proving that the production of
every class of foodstuff had increased by two hundred per cent, three hundred per cent, or
five hundred per cent, as the case might be. The animals saw no reason to disbelieve him,
especially as they could no longer remember very clearly what conditions had been like
before the Rebellion. All the same, there were days when they felt that they would sooner
have had less figures and more food.
All orders were now issued through Squealer or one of the other pigs. Napoleon himself was
not seen in public as often as once in a fortnight. When he did appear, he was attended not
only by his retinue of dogs but by a black cockerel who marched in front of him and acted as
a kind of trumpeter, letting out a loud “cock-a-doodle-doo” before Napoleon spoke. Even in
the farmhouse, it was said, Napoleon inhabited separate apartments from the others. He took
his meals alone, with two dogs to wait upon him, and always ate from the Crown Derby
dinner service which had been in the glass cupboard in the drawing-room. It was also
announced that the gun would be fired every year on Napoleon’s birthday, as well as on the
other two anniversaries.
Napoleon was now never spoken of simply as “Napoleon.” He was always referred to in
formal style as “our Leader, Comrade Napoleon,” and this pigs liked to invent for him such
titles as Father of All Animals, Terror of Mankind, Protector of the Sheep-fold, Ducklings’
Friend, and the like. In his speeches, Squealer would talk with the tears rolling down his
cheeks of Napoleon’s wisdom the goodness of his heart, and the deep love he bore to all
animals everywhere, even and especially the unhappy animals who still lived in ignorance
and slavery on other farms. It had become usual to give Napoleon the credit for every
successful achievement and every stroke of good fortune. You would often hear one hen
remark to another, “Under the guidance of our Leader, Comrade Napoleon, I have laid five
eggs in six days”; or two cows, enjoying a drink at the pool, would exclaim, “Thanks to the
leadership of Comrade Napoleon, how excellent this water tastes!” The general feeling on the
farm was well expressed in a poem entitled Comrade Napoleon, which was composed by
Minimus and which ran as follows:
Friend of fatherless!
Fountain of happiness!
Lord of the swill-bucket! Oh, how my soul is on
Fire when I gaze at thy
Calm and commanding eye,
Like the sun in the sky,
Comrade Napoleon!
Thou are the giver of
All that thy creatures love,
Full belly twice a day, clean straw to roll upon;
Every beast great or small
Sleeps at peace in his stall,
Thou watchest over all,
Comrade Napoleon!
Had I a sucking-pig,
Ere he had grown as big
Even as a pint bottle or as a rolling-pin,
He should have learned to be
Faithful and true to thee,
Yes, his first squeak should be
“Comrade Napoleon!”
Napoleon approved of this poem and caused it to be inscribed on the wall of the big barn, at
the opposite end from the Seven Commandments. It was surmounted by a portrait of
Napoleon, in profile, executed by Squealer in white paint.
Meanwhile, through the agency of Whymper, Napoleon was engaged in complicated
negotiations with Frederick and Pilkington. The pile of timber was still unsold. Of the two,
Frederick was the more anxious to get hold of it, but he would not offer a reasonable price. At
the same time there were renewed rumours that Frederick and his men were plotting to attack
Animal Farm and to destroy the windmill, the building of which had aroused furious jealousy
in him. Snowball was known to be still skulking on Pinchfield Farm. In the middle of the
summer the animals were alarmed to hear that three hens had come forward and confessed
that, inspired by Snowball, they had entered into a plot to murder Napoleon. They were
executed immediately, and fresh precautions for Napoleon’s safety were taken. Four dogs
guarded his bed at night, one at each corner, and a young pig named Pinkeye was given the
task of tasting all his food before he ate it, lest it should be poisoned.
At about the same time it was given out that Napoleon had arranged to sell the pile of timber
to Mr. Pilkington; he was also going to enter into a regular agreement for the exchange of
certain products between Animal Farm and Foxwood. The relations between Napoleon and
Pilkington, though they were only conducted through Whymper, were now almost friendly.
The animals distrusted Pilkington, as a human being, but greatly preferred him to Frederick,
whom they both feared and hated. As the summer wore on, and the windmill neared
completion, the rumours of an impending treacherous attack grew stronger and stronger.
Frederick, it was said, intended to bring against them twenty men all armed with guns, and he
had already bribed the magistrates and police, so that if he could once get hold of the titledeeds of Animal Farm they would ask no questions. Moreover, terrible stories were leaking
out from Pinchfield about the cruelties that Frederick practised upon his animals. He had
flogged an old horse to death, he starved his cows, he had killed a dog by throwing it into the
furnace, he amused himself in the evenings by making cocks fight with splinters of razorblade tied to their spurs. The animals’ blood boiled with rage when they heard of these things
beingdone to their comrades, and sometimes they clamoured to be allowed to go out in a
body and attack Pinchfield Farm, drive out the humans, and set the animals free. But Squealer
counselled them to avoid rash actions and trust in Comrade Napoleon’s strategy.
Nevertheless, feeling against Frederick continued to run high. One Sunday morning
Napoleon appeared in the barn and explained that he had never at any time contemplated
selling the pile of timber to Frederick; he considered it beneath his dignity, he said, to have
dealings with scoundrels of that description. The pigeons who were still sent out to spread
tidings of the Rebellion were forbidden to set foot anywhere on Foxwood, and were also
ordered to drop their former slogan of “Death to Humanity” in favour of “Death to
Frederick.” In the late summer yet another of Snowball’s machinations was laid bare. The
wheat crop was full of weeds, and it was discovered that on one of his nocturnal visits
Snowball had mixed weed seeds with the seed corn. A gander who had been privy to the plot
had confessed his guilt to Squealer and immediately committed suicide by swallowing deadly
nightshade berries. The animals now also learned that Snowball had never — as many of
them had believed hitherto — received the order of “Animal Hero, First Class.” This was
merely a legend which had been spread some time after the Battle of the Cowshed by
Snowball himself. So far from being decorated, he had been censured for showing cowardice
in the battle. Once again some of the animals heard this with a certain bewilderment, but
Squealer was soon able to convince them that their memories had been at fault.
In the autumn, by a tremendous, exhausting effort — for the harvest had to be gathered at
almost the same time — the windmill was finished. The machinery had still to be installed,
and Whymper was negotiating the purchase of it, but the structure was completed. In the
teeth of every difficulty, in spite of inexperience, of primitive implements, of bad luck and of
Snowball’s treachery, the work had been finished punctually to the very day! Tired out but
proud, the animals walked round and round their masterpiece, which appeared even more
beautiful in their eyes than when it had been built the first time. Moreover, the walls were
twice as thick as before. Nothing short of explosives would lay them low this time! And
when they thought of how they had laboured, what discouragements they had overcome, and
the enormous difference that would be made in their lives when the sails were turning and the
dynamos running — when they thought of all this, their tiredness forsook them and they
gambolled round and round the windmill, uttering cries of triumph. Napoleon himself,
attended by his dogs and his cockerel, came down to inspect the completed work; he
personally congratulated the animals on their achievement, and announced that the mill
would be named Napoleon Mill.
Two days later the animals were called together for a special meeting in the barn. They were
struck dumb with surprise when Napoleon announced that he had sold the pile of timber to
Frederick. Tomorrow Frederick’s wagons would arrive and begin carting it away.
Throughout the whole period of his seeming friendship with Pilkington, Napoleon had really
been in secret agreement with Frederick.
All relations with Foxwood had been broken off; insulting messages had been sent to
Pilkington. The pigeons had been told to avoid Pinchfield Farm and to alter their slogan from
“Death to Frederick” to “Death to Pilkington.” At the same time Napoleon assured the
animals that the stories of an impending attack on Animal Farm were completely untrue, and
that the tales about Frederick’s cruelty to his own animals had been greatly exaggerated. All
these rumours had probably originated with Snowball and his agents. It now appeared that
Snowball was not, after all, hiding on Pinchfield Farm, and in fact had never been there in his
life: he was living — in considerable luxury, so it was said —at Foxwood, and had in reality
been a pensioner of Pilkington for years past.
The pigs were in ecstasies over Napoleon’s cunning. By seeming to be friendly with
Pilkington he had forced Frederick to raise his price by twelve pounds. But the superior
quality of Napoleon’s mind, said Squealer, was shown in the fact that he trusted nobody, not
even Frederick. Frederick had wanted to pay for the timber with something called a cheque,
which, it seemed, was a piece of paper with a promise to pay written upon it. But Napoleon
was too clever for him. He had demanded payment in real five-pound notes, which were to be
handed over before the timber was removed. Already Frederick had paid up; and the sum he
had paid was just enough to buy the machinery for the windmill.
Meanwhile the timber was being carted away at high speed. When it was all gone, another
special meeting was held in the barn for the animals to inspect Frederick’s bank-notes.
Smiling beatifically, and wearing both his decorations, Napoleon reposed on a bed of straw
on the platform, with the money at his side, neatly piled on a china dish from the farmhouse
kitchen. The animals filed slowly past, and each gazed his fill. And Boxer put out his nose to
sniff at the bank-notes, and the flimsy white things stirred and rustled in his breath.
Three days later there was a terrible hullabaloo. Whymper, his face deadly pale, came racing
up the path on his bicycle, flung it down in the yard and rushed straight into the farmhouse.
The next moment a choking roar of rage sounded from Napoleon’s apartments. The news of
what had happened sped round the farm like wildfire. The banknotes were forgeries!
Frederick had got the timber for nothing!
Napoleon called the animals together immediately and in a terrible voice pronounced the
death sentence upon Frederick. When captured, he said, Frederick should be boiled alive. At
the same time he warned them that after this treacherous deed the worst was to be expected.
Frederick and his men might make their long-expected attack at any moment. Sentinels were
placed at all the approaches to the farm. In addition, four pigeons were sent to Foxwood with
a conciliatory message, which it was hoped might re-establish good relations with Pilkington.
The very next morning the attack came. The animals were at breakfast when the look-outs
came racing in with the news that Frederick and his followers had already come through the
five-barred gate. Boldly enough the animals sallied forth to meet them, but this time they did
not have the easy victory that they had had in the Battle of the Cowshed. There were fifteen
men, with half a dozen guns between them, and they opened fire as soon as they got within
fifty yards. The animals could not face the terrible explosions and the stinging pellets, and in
spite of the efforts of Napoleon and Boxer to rally them, they were soon driven back. A
number of them were already wounded. They took refuge in the farm buildings and peeped
cautiously out from chinks and knot-holes. The whole of the big pasture, including the
windmill, was in the hands of the enemy. For the moment even Napoleon seemed at a loss.
He paced up and down without a word, his tail rigid and twitching. Wistful glances were sent
in the direction of Foxwood. If Pilkington and his men would help them, the day might yet be
won. But at this moment the four pigeons, who had been sent out on the day before, returned,
one of them bearing a scrap of paper from Pilkington. On it was pencilled the words: “Serves
you right.”
Meanwhile Frederick and his men had halted about the windmill. The animals watched them,
and a murmur of dismay went round. Two of the men had produced a crowbar and a sledge
hammer. They were going to knock the windmill down.
“Impossible!” cried Napoleon. “We have built the walls far too thick for that. They could not
knock it down in a week. Courage, comrades!”
But Benjamin was watching the movements of the men intently. The two with the hammer
and the crowbar were drilling a hole near the base of the windmill. Slowly, and with an air
almost of amusement, Benjamin nodded his long muzzle.
“I thought so,” he said. “Do you not see what they are doing? In another moment they are
going to pack blasting powder into that hole.”
Terrified, the animals waited. It was impossible now to venture out of the shelter of the
buildings. After a few minutes the men were seen to be running in all directions. Then there
was a deafening roar. The pigeons swirled into the air, and all the animals, except Napoleon,
flung themselves flat on their bellies and hid their faces. When they got up again, a huge
cloud of black smoke was hanging where the windmill had been. Slowly the breeze drifted it
away. The windmill had ceased to exist!
At this sight the animals’ courage returned to them. The fear and despair they had felt a
moment earlier were drowned in their rage against this vile, contemptible act. A mighty cry
for vengeance went up, and without waiting for further orders they charged forth in a body
and made straight for the enemy. This time they did not heed the cruel pellets that swept over
them like hail. It was a savage, bitter battle. The men fired again and again, and, when the
animals got to close quarters, lashed out with their sticks and their heavy boots. A cow, three
sheep, and two geese were killed, and nearly everyone was wounded. Even Napoleon, who
was directing operations from the rear, had the tip of his tail chipped by a pellet. But the men
did not go unscathed either. Three of them had their heads broken by blows from Boxer’s
hoofs; another was gored in the belly by a cow’s horn; another had his trousers nearly torn off
by Jessie and Bluebell. And when the nine dogs of Napoleon’s own bodyguard, whom he had
instructed to make a detour under cover of the hedge, suddenly appeared on the men’s flank,
baying ferociously, panic overtook them. They saw that they were in danger of being
surrounded. Frederick shouted to his men to get out while the going was good, and the next
moment the cowardly enemy was running for dear life. The animals chased them right down
to the bottom of the field, and got in some last kicks at them as they forced their way through
the thorn hedge.
They had won, but they were weary and bleeding. Slowly they began to limp back towards
the farm. The sight of their dead comrades stretched upon the grass moved some of them to
tears. And for a little while they halted in sorrowful silence at the place where the windmill
had once stood. Yes, it was gone; almost the last trace of their labour was gone! Even the
foundations were partially destroyed. And in rebuilding it they could not this time, as before,
make use of the fallen stones. This time the stones had vanished too. The force of the
explosion had flung them to distances of hundreds of yards. It was as though the windmill
had never been.
As they approached the farm Squealer, who had unaccountably been absent during the
fighting, came skipping towards them, whisking his tail and beaming with satisfaction. And
the animals heard, from the direction of the farm buildings, the solemn booming of a gun.
“What is that gun firing for?” said Boxer.
“To celebrate our victory!” cried Squealer.
“What victory?” said Boxer. His knees were bleeding, he had lost a shoe and split his hoof,
and a dozen pellets had lodged themselves in his hind leg.
“What victory, comrade? Have we not driven the enemy off our soil — the sacred soil of
Animal Farm?”
“But they have destroyed the windmill. And we had worked on it for two years!”
“What matter? We will build another windmill. We will build six windmills if we feel like it.
You do not appreciate, comrade, the mighty thing that we have done. The enemy was in
occupation of this very ground that we stand upon. And now — thanks to the leadership of
Comrade Napoleon — we have won every inch of it back again!”
“Then we have won back what we had before,” said Boxer.
“That is our victory,” said Squealer.
They limped into the yard. The pellets under the skin of Boxer’s leg smarted painfully. He
saw ahead of him the heavy labour of rebuilding the windmill from the foundations, and
already in imagination he braced himself for the task. But for the first time it occurred to him
that he was eleven years old and that perhaps his great muscles were not quite what they had
once been.
But when the animals saw the green flag flying, and heard the gun firing again — seven times
it was fired in all —and heard the speech that Napoleon made, congratulating them on their
conduct, it did seem to them after all that they had won a great victory. The animals slain in
the battle were given a solemn funeral. Boxer and Clover pulled the wagon which served as a
hearse, and Napoleon himself walked at the head of the procession. Two whole days were
given over to celebrations. There were songs, speeches, and more firing of the gun, and a
special gift of an apple was bestowed on every animal, with two ounces of corn for each bird
and three biscuits for each dog. It was announced that the battle would be called the Battle of
the Windmill, and that Napoleon had created a new decoration, the Order of the Green
Banner, which he had conferred upon himself. In the general rejoicings the unfortunate affair
of the banknotes was forgotten.
It was a few days later than this that the pigs came upon a case of whisky in the cellars of the
farmhouse. It had been overlooked at the time when the house was first occupied. That night
there came from the farmhouse the sound of loud singing, in which, to everyone’s surprise,
the strains of ‘Beasts of England’ were mixed up. At about half past nine Napoleon, wearing
an old bowler hat of Mr. Jones’s, was distinctly seen to emerge from the back door, gallop
rapidly round the yard, and disappear indoors again. But in the morning a deep silence hung
over the farmhouse. Not a pig appeared to be stirring. It was nearly nine o’clock when
Squealer made his appearance, walking slowly and dejectedly, his eyes dull, his tail hanging
limply behind him, and with every appearance of being seriously ill. He called the animals
together and told them that he had a terrible piece of news to impart. Comrade Napoleon was
dying!
A cry of lamentation went up. Straw was laid down outside the doors of the farmhouse, and
the animals walked on tiptoe. With tears in their eyes they asked one another what they
should do if their Leader were taken away from them. A rumour went round that Snowball
had after all contrived to introduce poison into Napoleon’s food. At eleven o’clock Squealer
came out to make another announcement. As his last act upon earth, Comrade Napoleon had
pronounced a solemn decree: the drinking of alcohol was to be punished by death.
By the evening, however, Napoleon appeared to be somewhat better, and the following
morning Squealer was able to tell them that he was well on the way to recovery. By the
evening of that day Napoleon was back at work, and on the next day it was learned that he
had instructed Whymper to purchase in Willingdon some booklets on brewing and distilling.
A week later Napoleon gave orders that the small paddock beyond the orchard, which it had
previously been intended to set aside as a grazing-ground for animals who were past work,
was to be ploughed up. It was given out that the pasture was exhausted and needed reseeding; but it soon became known that Napoleon intended to sow it with barley.
About this time there occurred a strange incident which hardly anyone was able to
understand. One night at about twelve o’clock there was a loud crash in the yard, and the
animals rushed out of their stalls. It was a moonlit night. At the foot of the end wall of the big
barn, where the Seven Commandments were written, there lay a ladder broken in two pieces.
Squealer, temporarily stunned, was sprawling beside it, and near at hand there lay a lantern, a
paint-brush, and an overturned pot of white paint. The dogs immediately made a ring round
Squealer, and escorted him back to the farmhouse as soon as he was able to walk. None of the
animals could form any idea as to what this meant, except old Benjamin, who nodded his
muzzle with a knowing air, and seemed to understand, but would say nothing.
But a few days later Muriel, reading over the Seven Commandments to herself, noticed that
there was yet another of them which the animals had remembered wrong. They had thought
the Fifth Commandment was “No animal shall drink alcohol,” but there were two words that
they had forgotten. Actually the Commandment read: “No animal shall drink alcohol TO
EXCESS.”
Boxer’s split hoof was a long time in healing. They had started the rebuilding of the windmill
the day after the victory celebrations were ended. Boxer refused to take even a day off work,
and made it a point of honour not to let it be seen that he was in pain. In the evenings he
would admit privately to Clover that the hoof troubled him a great deal. Clover treated the
hoof with poultices of herbs which she prepared by chewing them, and both she and
Benjamin urged Boxer to work less hard. “A horse’s lungs do not last for ever,” she said to
him. But Boxer would not listen. He had, he said, only one real ambition left — to see the
windmill well under way before he reached the age for retirement.
At the beginning, when the laws of Animal Farm were first formulated, the retiring age had
been fixed for horses and pigs at twelve, for cows at fourteen, for dogs at nine, for sheep at
seven, and for hens and geese at five. Liberal old-age pensions had been agreed upon. As yet
no animal had actually retired on pension, but of late the subject had been discussed more and
more. Now that the small field beyond the orchard had been set aside for barley, it was
rumoured that a corner of the large pasture was to be fenced off and turned into a grazingground for superannuated animals. For a horse, it was said, the pension would be five pounds
of corn a day and, in winter, fifteen pounds of hay, with a carrot or possibly an apple on
public holidays. Boxer’s twelfth birthday was due in the late summer of the following year.
Meanwhile life was hard. The winter was as cold as the last one had been, and food was even
shorter. Once again all rations were reduced, except those of the pigs and the dogs. A too
rigid equality in rations, Squealer explained, would have been contrary to the principles of
Animalism. In any case he had no difficulty in proving to the other animals that they were
NOT in reality short of food, whatever the appearances might be. For the time being,
certainly, it had been found necessary to make a readjustment of rations (Squealer always
spoke of it as a “readjustment,” never as a“reduction”), but in comparison with the days of
Jones, the improvement was enormous. Reading out the figures in a shrill, rapid voice, he
proved to them in detail that they had more oats, more hay, more turnips than they had had in
Jones’s day, that they worked shorter hours, that their drinking water was of better quality,
that they lived longer, that a larger proportion of their young ones survived infancy, and that
they had more straw in their stalls and suffered less from fleas. The animals believed every
word of it. Truth to tell, Jones and all he stood for had almost faded out of their memories.
They knew that life nowadays was harsh and bare, that they were often hungry and often
cold, and that they were usually working when they were not asleep. But doubtless it had
been worse in the old days. They were glad to believe so. Besides, in those days they had
been slaves and now they were free, and that made all the difference, as Squealer did not fail
to point out.
There were many more mouths to feed now. In the autumn the four sows had all littered
about simultaneously, producing thirty-one young pigs between them. The young pigs were
piebald, and as Napoleon was the only boar on the farm, it was possible to guess at their
parentage. It was announced that later, when bricks and timber had been purchased, a
schoolroom would be built in the farmhouse garden. For the time being, the young pigs were
given their instruction by Napoleon himself in the farmhouse kitchen. They took their
exercise in the garden, and were discouraged from playing with the other young animals.
About this time, too, it was laid down as a rule that when a pig and any other animal met on
the path, the other animal must stand aside: and also that all pigs, of whatever degree, were to
have the privilege of wearing green ribbons on their tails on Sundays.
The farm had had a fairly successful year, but was still short of money. There were the bricks,
sand, and lime for the schoolroom to be purchased, and it would also be necessary to begin
saving up again for the machinery for the windmill. Then there were lamp oil and candles for
the house, sugar for Napoleon’s own table (he forbade this to the other pigs, on the ground
that it made them fat), and all the usual replacements such as tools, nails, string, coal, wire,
scrap-iron, and dog biscuits. A stump of hay and part of the potato crop were sold off, and the
contract for eggs was increased to six hundred a week, so that that year the hens barely
hatched enough chicks to keep their numbers at the same level. Rations, reduced in
December, were reduced again in February, and lanterns in the stalls were forbidden to save
oil. But the pigs seemed comfortable enough, and in fact were putting on weight if anything.
One afternoon in late February a warm, rich, appetising scent, such as the animals had never
smelt before, wafted itself across the yard from the little brew-house, which had been disused
in Jones’s time, and which stood beyond the kitchen. Someone said it was the smell of
cooking barley. The animals sniffed the air hungrily and wondered whether a warm mash was
being prepared for their supper. But no warm mash appeared, and on the following Sunday it
was announced that from now onwards all barley would be reserved for the pigs. The field
beyond the orchard had already been sown with barley. And the news soon leaked out that
every pig was now receiving a ration of a pint of beer daily, with half a gallon for Napoleon
himself, which was always served to him in the Crown Derby soup tureen.
But if there were hardships to be borne, they were partly offset by the fact that life nowadays
had a greater dignity than it had had before. There were more songs, more speeches, more
processions. Napoleon had commanded that once a week there should be held something
called a Spontaneous Demonstration, the object of which was to celebrate the struggles and
triumphs of Animal Farm. At the appointed time the animals would leave their work and
march round the precincts of the farm in military formation, with the pigs leading, then the
horses, then the cows, then the sheep, and then the poultry. The dogs flanked the procession
and at the head of all marched Napoleon’s black cockerel. Boxer and Clover always carried
between them a green banner marked with the hoof and the horn and the caption, “Long live
Comrade Napoleon!” Afterwards there were recitations of poems composed in Napoleon’s
honour, and a speech by Squealer giving particulars of the latest increases in the production
of foodstuffs, and on occasion a shot was fired from the gun. The sheep were the greatest
devotees of the Spontaneous Demonstration, and if anyone complained (as a few animals
sometimes did, when no pigs or dogs were near) that they wasted time and meant a lot of
standing about in the cold, the sheep were sure to silence him with a tremendous bleating of
“Four legs good, two legs bad!” But by and large the animals enjoyed these celebrations.
They found it comforting to be reminded that, after all, they were truly their own masters and
that the work they did was for their own benefit. So that, what with the songs, the
processions, Squealer’s lists of figures, the thunder of the gun, the crowing of the cockerel,
and the fluttering of the flag, they were able to forget that their bellies were empty, at least
part of the time.
In April, Animal Farm was proclaimed a Republic, and it became necessary to elect a
President. There was only one candidate, Napoleon, who was elected unanimously. On the
same day it was given out that fresh documents had been discovered which revealed further
details about Snowball’s complicity with Jones. It now appeared that Snowball had not, as the
animals had previously imagined, merely attempted to lose the Battle of the Cowshed by
means of a stratagem, but had been openly fighting on Jones’s side. In fact, it was he who had
actually been the leader of the human forces, and had charged into battle with the words
“Long live Humanity!” on his lips. The wounds on Snowball’s back, which a few of the
animals still remembered to have seen, had been inflicted by Napoleon’s teeth.
In the middle of the summer Moses the raven suddenly reappeared on the farm, after an
absence of several years. He was quite unchanged, still did no work, and talked in the same
strain as ever about Sugarcandy Mountain. He would perch on a stump, flap his black wings,
and talk by the hour to anyone who would listen. “Up there, comrades,” he would say
solemnly, pointing to the sky with his large beak —“up there, just on the other side of that
dark cloud that you can see — there it lies, Sugarcandy Mountain, that happy country where
we poor animals shall rest for ever from our labours!” He even claimed to have been there on
one of his higher flights, and to have seen the everlasting fields of clover and the linseed cake
and lump sugar growing on the hedges. Many of the animals believed him. Their lives now,
they reasoned, were hungry and laborious; was it not right and just that a better world should
exist somewhere else? A thing that was difficult to determine was the attitude of the pigs
towards Moses. They all declared contemptuously that his stories about Sugarcandy
Mountain were lies, and yet they allowed him to remain on the farm, not working, with an
allowance of a gill of beer a day.
After his hoof had healed up, Boxer worked harder than ever. Indeed, all the animals worked
like slaves that year. Apart from the regular work of the farm, and the rebuilding of the
windmill, there was the schoolhouse for the young pigs, which was started in March.
Sometimes the long hours on insufficient food were hard to bear, but Boxer never faltered. In
nothing that he said or did was there any sign that his strength was not what it had been. It
was only his appearance that was a little altered; his hide was less shiny than it had used to
be, and his great haunches seemed to have shrunken. The others said, “Boxer will pick up
when the spring grass comes on”; but the spring came and Boxer grew no fatter. Sometimes
on the slope leading to the top of the quarry, when he braced his muscles against the weight
of some vast boulder, it seemed that nothing kept him on his feet except the will to continue.
At such times his lips were seen to form the words, “I will work harder”; he had no voice left.
Once again Clover and Benjamin warned him to take care of his health, but Boxer paid no
attention. His twelfth birthday was approaching. He did not care what happened so long as a
good store of stone was accumulated before he went on pension.
Late one evening in the summer, a sudden rumour ran round the farm that something had
happened to Boxer. He had gone out alone to drag a load of stone down to the windmill. And
sure enough, the rumour was true. A few minutes later two pigeons came racing in with the
news; “Boxer has fallen! He is lying on his side and can’t get up!”
About half the animals on the farm rushed out to the knoll where the windmill stood. There
lay Boxer, between the shafts of the cart, his neck stretched out, unable even to raise his head.
His eyes were glazed, his sides matted with sweat. A thin stream of blood had trickled out of
his mouth. Clover dropped to her knees at his side.
“Boxer!” she cried, “how are you?”
“It is my lung,” said Boxer in a weak voice. “It does not matter. I think you will be able to
finish the windmill without me. There is a pretty good store of stone accumulated. I had only
another month to go in any case. To tell you the truth, I had been looking forward to my
retirement. And perhaps, as Benjamin is growing old too, they will let him retire at the same
time and be a companion to me.”
“We must get help at once,” said Clover. “Run, somebody, and tell Squealer what has
happened.”
All the other animals immediately raced back to the farmhouse to give Squealer the news.
Only Clover remained, and Benjamin who lay down at Boxer’s side, and, without speaking,
kept the flies off him with his long tail. After about a quarter of an hour Squealer appeared,
full of sympathy and concern. He said that Comrade Napoleon had learned with the very
deepest distress of this misfortune to one of the most loyal workers on the farm, and was
already making arrangements to send Boxer to be treated in the hospital at Willingdon. The
animals felt a little uneasy at this. Except for Mollie and Snowball, no other animal had ever
left the farm, and they did not like to think of their sick comrade in the hands of human
beings. However, Squealer easily convinced them that the veterinary surgeon in Willingdon
could treat Boxer’s case more satisfactorily than could be done on the farm. And about half
an hour later, when Boxer had somewhat recovered, he was with difficulty got on to his feet,
and managed to limp back to his stall, where Clover and Benjamin had prepared a good bed
of straw for him.
For the next two days Boxer remained in his stall. The pigs had sent out a large bottle of pink
medicine which they had found in the medicine chest in the bathroom, and Clover
administered it to Boxer twice a day after meals. In the evenings she lay in his stall and talked
to him, while Benjamin kept the flies off him. Boxer professed not to be sorry for what had
happened. If he made a good recovery, he might expect to live another three years, and he
looked forward to the peaceful days that he would spend in the corner of the big pasture. It
would be the first time that he had had leisure to study and improve his mind. He intended, he
said, to devote the rest of his life to learning the remaining twenty-two letters of the alphabet.
However, Benjamin and Clover could only be with Boxer after working hours, and it was in
the middle of the day when the van came to take him away. The animals were all at work
weeding turnips under the supervision of a pig, when they were astonished to see Benjamin
come galloping from the direction of the farm buildings, braying at the top of his voice. It
was the first time that they had ever seen Benjamin excited — indeed, it was the first time
that anyone had ever seen him gallop. “Quick, quick!” he shouted. “Come at once! They’re
taking Boxer away!” Without waiting for orders from the pig, the animals broke off work and
raced back to the farm buildings. Sure enough, there in the yard was a large closed van,
drawn by two horses, with lettering on its side and a sly-looking man in a low-crowned
bowler hat sitting on the driver’s seat. And Boxer’s stall was empty.
The animals crowded round the van. “Good-bye, Boxer!” they chorused, “good-bye!”
“Fools! Fools!” shouted Benjamin, prancing round them and stamping the earth with his
small hoofs. “Fools! Do you not see what is written on the side of that van?”
That gave the animals pause, and there was a hush. Muriel began to spell out the words. But
Benjamin pushed her aside and in the midst of a deadly silence he read:
“‘Alfred Simmonds, Horse Slaughterer and Glue Boiler, Willingdon. Dealer in Hides and
Bone-Meal. Kennels Supplied.’Do you not understand what that means? They are taking
Boxer to the knacker’s!”
A cry of horror burst from all the animals. At this moment the man on the box whipped up his
horses and the van moved out of the yard at a smart trot. All the animals followed, crying out
at the tops of their voices. Clover forced her way to the front. The van began to gather speed.
Clover tried to stir her stout limbs to a gallop, and achieved a canter. “Boxer!” she cried.
“Boxer! Boxer! Boxer!” And just at this moment, as though he had heard the uproar outside,
Boxer’s face, with the white stripe down his nose, appeared at the small window at the back
of the van.
“Boxer!” cried Clover in a terrible voice. “Boxer! Get out! Get out quickly! They’re taking
you to your death!”
All the animals took up the cry of “Get out, Boxer, get out!” But the van was already
gathering speed and drawing away from them. It was uncertain whether Boxer had
understood what Clover had said. But a moment later his face disappeared from the window
and there was the sound of a tremendous drumming of hoofs inside the van. He was trying to
kick his way out. The time had been when a few kicks from Boxer’s hoofs would have
smashed the van to matchwood. But alas! his strength had left him; and in a few moments the
sound of drumming hoofs grew fainter and died away. In desperation the animals began
appealing to the two horses which drew the van to stop. “Comrades, comrades!” they
shouted. “Don’t take your own brother to his death! “But the stupid brutes, too ignorant to
realise what was happening, merely set back their ears and quickened their pace. Boxer’s face
did not reappear at the window. Too late, someone thought of racing ahead and shutting the
five-barred gate; but in another moment the van was through it and rapidly disappearing
down the road. Boxer was never seen again.
Three days later it was announced that he had died in the hospital at Willingdon, in spite of
receiving every attention a horse could have. Squealer came to announce the news to the
others. He had, he said, been present during Boxer’s last hours.
“It was the most affecting sight I have ever seen!” said Squealer, lifting his trotter and wiping
away a tear. “I was at his bedside at the very last. And at the end, almost too weak to speak,
he whispered in my ear that his sole sorrow was to have passed on before the windmill was
finished. ‘Forward, comrades!’ he whispered. ‘Forward in the name of the Rebellion. Long
live Animal Farm! Long live Comrade Napoleon! Napoleon is always right.’ Those were his
very last words, comrades.”
Here Squealer’s demeanour suddenly changed. He fell silent for a moment, and his little eyes
darted suspicious glances from side to side before he proceeded.
It had come to his knowledge, he said, that a foolish and wicked rumour had been circulated
at the time of Boxer’s removal. Some of the animals had noticed that the van which took
Boxer away was marked “Horse Slaughterer,” and had actually jumped to the conclusion that
Boxer was being sent to the knacker’s. It was almost unbelievable, said Squealer, that any
animal could be so stupid. Surely, he cried indignantly, whisking his tail and skipping from
side to side, surely they knew their beloved Leader, Comrade Napoleon, better than that? But
the explanation was really very simple. The van had previously been the property of the
knacker, and had been bought by the veterinary surgeon, who had not yet painted the old
name out. That was how the mistake had arisen.
The animals were enormously relieved to hear this. And when Squealer went on to give
further graphic details of Boxer’s death-bed, the admirable care he had received, and the
expensive medicines for which Napoleon had paid without a thought as to the cost, their last
doubts disappeared and the sorrow that they felt for their comrade’s death was tempered by
the thought that at least he had died happy.
Napoleon himself appeared at the meeting on the following Sunday morning and pronounced
a short oration in Boxer’s honour. It had not been possible, he said, to bring back their
lamented comrade’s remains for interment on the farm, but he had ordered a large wreath to
be made from the laurels in the farmhouse garden and sent down to be placed on Boxer’s
grave. And in a few days’ time the pigs intended to hold a memorial banquet in Boxer’s
honour. Napoleon ended his speech with a reminder of Boxer’s two favourite maxims, “I will
work harder” and “Comrade Napoleon is always right”— maxims, he said, which every
animal would do well to adopt as his own.
On the day appointed for the banquet, a grocer’s van drove up from Willingdon and delivered
a large wooden crate at the farmhouse. That night there was the sound of uproarious singing,
which was followed by what sounded like a violent quarrel and ended at about eleven o’clock
with a tremendous crash of glass. No one stirred in the farmhouse before noon on the
following day, and the word went round that from somewhere or other the pigs had acquired
the money to buy themselves another case of whisky.
Years passed. The seasons came and went, the short animal lives fled by. A time came when
there was no one who remembered the old days before the Rebellion, except Clover,
Benjamin, Moses the raven, and a number of the pigs.
Muriel was dead; Bluebell, Jessie, and Pincher were dead. Jones too was dead — he had died
in an inebriates’ home in another part of the country. Snowball was forgotten. Boxer was
forgotten, except by the few who had known him. Clover was an old stout mare now, stiff in
the joints and with a tendency to rheumy eyes. She was two years past the retiring age, but in
fact no animal had ever actually retired. The talk of setting aside a corner of the pasture for
superannuated animals had long since been dropped. Napoleon was now a mature boar of
twenty-four stone. Squealer was so fat that he could with difficulty see out of his eyes. Only
old Benjamin was much the same as ever, except for being a little greyer about the muzzle,
and, since Boxer’s death, more morose and taciturn than ever.
There were many more creatures on the farm now, though the increase was not so great as
had been expected in earlier years. Many animals had been born to whom the Rebellion was
only a dim tradition, passed on by word of mouth, and others had been bought who had never
heard mention of such a thing before their arrival. The farm possessed three horses now
besides Clover. They were fine upstanding beasts, willing workers and good comrades, but
very stupid. None of them proved able to learn the alphabet beyond the letter B. They
accepted everything that they were told about the Rebellion and the principles of Animalism,
especially from Clover, for whom they had an almost filial respect; but it was doubtful
whether they understood very much of it.
The farm was more prosperous now, and better organised: it had even been enlarged by two
fields which had been bought from Mr. Pilkington. The windmill had been successfully
completed at last, and the farm possessed a threshing machine and a hay elevator of its own,
and various new buildings had been added to it. Whymper had bought himself a dogcart. The
windmill, however, had not after all been used for generating electrical power. It was used for
milling corn, and brought in a handsome money profit. The animals were hard at work
building yet another windmill; when that one was finished, so it was said, the dynamos would
be installed. But the luxuries of which Snowball had once taught the animals to dream, the
stalls with electric light and hot and cold water, and the three-day week, were no longer
talked about. Napoleon had denounced such ideas as contrary to the spirit of Animalism. The
truest happiness, he said, lay in working hard and living frugally.
Somehow it seemed as though the farm had grown richer without making the animals
themselves any richer-except, of course, for the pigs and the dogs. Perhaps this was partly
because there were so many pigs and so many dogs. It was not that these creatures did not
work, after their fashion. There was, as Squealer was never tired of explaining, endless work
in the supervision and organisation of the farm. Much of this work was of a kind that the
other animals were too ignorant to understand. For example, Squealer told them that the pigs
had to expend enormous labours every day upon mysterious things called “files,” “reports,”
“minutes,” and “memoranda”. These were large sheets of paper which had to be closely
covered with writing, and as soon as they were so covered, they were burnt in the furnace.
This was of the highest importance for the welfare of the farm, Squealer said. But still,
neither pigs nor dogs produced any food by their own labour; and there were very many of
them, and their appetites were always good.
As for the others, their life, so far as they knew, was as it had always been. They were
generally hungry, they slept on straw, they drank from the pool, they laboured in the fields; in
winter they were troubled by the cold, and in summer by the flies. Sometimes the older ones
among them racked their dim memories and tried to determine whether in the early days of
the Rebellion, when Jones’s expulsion was still recent, things had been better or worse than
now. They could not remember. There was nothing with which they could compare their
present lives: they had nothing to go upon except Squealer’s lists of figures, which invariably
demonstrated that everything was getting better and better. The animals found the problem
insoluble; in any case, they had little time for speculating on such things now. Only old
Benjamin professed to remember every detail of his long life and to know that things never
had been, nor ever could be much better or much worse — hunger, hardship, and
disappointment being, so he said, the unalterable law of life.
And yet the animals never gave up hope. More, they never lost, even for an instant, their
sense of honour and privilege in being members of Animal Farm. They were still the only
farm in the whole county — in all England! — owned and operated by animals. Not one of
them, not even the youngest, not even the newcomers who had been brought from farms ten
or twenty miles away, ever ceased to marvel at that. And when they heard the gun booming
and saw the green flag fluttering at the masthead, their hearts swelled with imperishable
pride, and the talk turned always towards the old heroic days, the expulsion of Jones, the
writing of the Seven Commandments, the great battles in which the human invaders had been
defeated. None of the old dreams had been abandoned. The Republic of the Animals which
Major had foretold, when the green fields of England should be untrodden by human feet,
was still believed in. Some day it was coming: it might not be soon, it might not be with in
the lifetime of any animal now living, but still it was coming. Even the tune of ‘Beasts of
England’ was perhaps hummed secretly here and there: at any rate, it was a fact that every
animal on the farm knew it, though no one would have dared to sing it aloud. It might be that
their lives were hard and that not all of their hopes had been fulfilled; but they were
conscious that they were not as other animals. If they went hungry, it was not from feeding
tyrannical human beings; if they worked hard, at least they worked for themselves. No
creature among them went upon two legs. No creature called any other creature “Master.” All
animals were equal.
One day in early summer Squealer ordered the sheep to follow him, and led them out to a
piece of waste ground at the other end of the farm, which had become overgrown with birch
saplings. The sheep spent the whole day there browsing at the leaves under Squealer’s
supervision. In the evening he returned to the farmhouse himself, but, as it was warm
weather, told the sheep to stay where they were. It ended by their remaining there for a whole
week, during which time the other animals saw nothing of them. Squealer was with them for
the greater part of every day. He was, he said, teaching them to sing a new song, for which
privacy was needed.
It was just after the sheep had returned, on a pleasant evening when the animals had finished
work and were making their way back to the farm buildings, that the terrified neighing of a
horse sounded from the yard. Startled, the animals stopped in their tracks. It was Clover’s
voice. She neighed again, and all the animals broke into a gallop and rushed into the yard.
Then they saw what Clover had seen.
It was a pig walking on his hind legs.
Yes, it was Squealer. A little awkwardly, as though not quite used to supporting his
considerable bulk in that position, but with perfect balance, he was strolling across the yard.
And a moment later, out from the door of the farmhouse came a long file of pigs, all walking
on their hind legs. Some did it better than others, one or two were even a trifle unsteady and
looked as though they would have liked the support of a stick, but every one of them made
his way right round the yard successfully. And finally there was a tremendous baying of dogs
and a shrill crowing from the black cockerel, and out came Napoleon himself, majestically
upright, casting haughty glances from side to side, and with his dogs gambolling round him.
He carried a whip in his trotter.
There was a deadly silence. Amazed, terrified, huddling together, the animals watched the
long line of pigs march slowly round the yard. It was as though the world had turned upsidedown. Then there came a moment when the first shock had worn off and when, in spite of
everything-in spite of their terror of the dogs, and of the habit, developed through long years,
of never complaining, never criticising, no matter what happened — they might have uttered
some word of protest. But just at that moment, as though at a signal, all the sheep burst out
into a tremendous bleating of —
“Four legs good, two legs BETTER! Four legs good, two legs BETTER! Four legs good, two
legs BETTER!”
It went on for five minutes without stopping. And by the time the sheep had quieted down,
the chance to utter any protest had passed, for the pigs had marched back into the farmhouse.
Benjamin felt a nose nuzzling at his shoulder. He looked round. It was Clover. Her old eyes
looked dimmer than ever. Without saying anything, she tugged gently at his mane and led
him round to the end of the big barn, where the Seven Commandments were written. For a
minute or two they stood gazing at the tatted wall with its white lettering.
“My sight is failing,” she said finally. “Even when I was young I could not have read what
was written there. But it appears to me that that wall looks different. Are the Seven
Commandments the same as they used to be, Benjamin?”
For once Benjamin consented to break his rule, and he read out to her what was written on
the wall. There was nothing there now except a single Commandment. It ran:
ALL ANIMALS ARE EQUAL
BUT SOME ANIMALS ARE MORE EQUAL THAN OTHERS
After that it did not seem strange when next day the pigs who were supervising the work of
the farm all carried whips in their trotters. It did not seem strange to learn that the pigs had
bought themselves a wireless set, were arranging to install a telephone, and had taken out
subscriptions to ‘John Bull’, ‘Tit-Bits’, and the ‘Daily Mirror’.It did not seem strange when
Napoleon was seen strolling in the farmhouse garden with a pipe in his mouth — no, not even
when the pigs took Mr. Jones’s clothes out of the wardrobes and put them on, Napoleon
himself appearing in a black coat, ratcatcher breeches, and leather leggings, while his
favourite sow appeared in the watered silk dress which Mrs. Jones had been used to wearing
on Sundays.
A week later, in the afternoon, a number of dog-carts drove up to the farm. A deputation of
neighbouring farmers had been invited to make a tour of inspection. They were shown all
over the farm, and expressed great admiration for everything they saw, especially the
windmill. The animals were weeding the turnip field. They worked diligently hardly raising
their faces from the ground, and not knowing whether to be more frightened of the pigs or of
the human visitors.
That evening loud laughter and bursts of singing came from the farmhouse. And suddenly, at
the sound of the mingled voices, the animals were stricken with curiosity. What could be
happening in there, now that for the first time animals and human beings were meeting on
terms of equality? With one accord they began to creep as quietly as possible into the
farmhouse garden.
At the gate they paused, half frightened to go on but Clover led the way in. They tiptoed up to
the house, and such animals as were tall enough peered in at the dining-room window. There,
round the long table, sat half a dozen farmers and half a dozen of the more eminent pigs,
Napoleon himself occupying the seat of honour at the head of the table. The pigs appeared
completely at ease in their chairs. The company had been enjoying a game of cards but had
broken off for the moment, evidently in order to drink a toast. A large jug was circulating,
and the mugs were being refilled with beer. No one noticed the wondering faces of the
animals that gazed in at the window.
Mr. Pilkington, of Foxwood, had stood up, his mug in his hand. In a moment, he said, he
would ask the present company to drink a toast. But before doing so, there were a few words
that he felt it incumbent upon him to say.
It was a source of great satisfaction to him, he said — and, he was sure, to all others present
— to feel that a long period of mistrust and misunderstanding had now come to an end. There
had been a time — not that he, or any of the present company, had shared such sentiments —
but there had been a time when the respected proprietors of Animal Farm had been regarded,
he would not say with hostility, but perhaps with a certain measure of misgiving, by their
human neighbours. Unfortunate incidents had occurred, mistaken ideas had been current. It
had been felt that the existence of a farm owned and operated by pigs was somehow
abnormal and was liable to have an unsettling effect in the neighbourhood. Too many farmers
had assumed, without due enquiry, that on such a farm a spirit of licence and indiscipline
would prevail. They had been nervous about the effects upon their own animals, or even upon
their human employees. But all such doubts were now dispelled. Today he and his friends
had visited Animal Farm and inspected every inch of it with their own eyes, and what did
they find? Not only the most up-to-date methods, but a discipline and an orderliness which
should be an example to all farmers everywhere. He believed that he was right in saying that
the lower animals on Animal Farm did more work and received less food than any animals in
the county. Indeed, he and his fellow-visitors today had observed many features which they
intended to introduce on their own farms immediately.
He would end his remarks, he said, by emphasising once again the friendly feelings that
subsisted, and ought to subsist, between Animal Farm and its neighbours. Between pigs and
human beings there was not, and there need not be, any clash of interests whatever. Their
struggles and their difficulties were one. Was not the labour problem the same everywhere?
Here it became apparent that Mr. Pilkington was about to spring some carefully prepared
witticism on the company, but for a moment he was too overcome by amusement to be able
to utter it. After much choking, during which his various chins turned purple, he managed to
get it out: “If you have your lower animals to contend with,” he said, “we have our lower
classes!” This BON MOT set the table in a roar; and Mr. Pilkington once again congratulated
the pigs on the low rations, the long working hours, and the general absence of pampering
which he had observed on Animal Farm.
And now, he said finally, he would ask the company to rise to their feet and make certain that
their glasses were full. “Gentlemen,” concluded Mr. Pilkington, “gentlemen, I give you a
toast: To the prosperity of Animal Farm!”
There was enthusiastic cheering and stamping of feet. Napoleon was so gratified that he left
his place and came round the table to clink his mug against Mr. Pilkington’s before emptying
it. When the cheering had died down, Napoleon, who had remained on his feet, intimated that
he too had a few words to say.
Like all of Napoleon’s speeches, it was short and to the point. He too, he said, was happy that
the period of misunderstanding was at an end. For a long time there had been rumours —
circulated, he had reason to think, by some malignant enemy — that there was something
subversive and even revolutionary in the outlook of himself and his colleagues. They had
been credited with attempting to stir up rebellion among the animals on neighbouring farms.
Nothing could be further from the truth! Their sole wish, now and in the past, was to live at
peace and in normal business relations with their neighbours. This farm which he had the
honour to control, he added, was a co-operative enterprise. The title-deeds, which were in his
own possession, were owned by the pigs jointly.
He did not believe, he said, that any of the old suspicions still lingered, but certain changes
had been made recently in the routine of the farm which should have the effect of promoting
confidence still further. Hitherto the animals on the farm had had a rather foolish custom of
addressing one another as “Comrade.” This was to be suppressed. There had also been a very
strange custom, whose origin was unknown, of marching every Sunday morning past a boar’s
skull which was nailed to a post in the garden. This, too, would be suppressed, and the skull
had already been buried. His visitors might have observed, too, the green flag which flew
from the masthead. If so, they would perhaps have noted that the white hoof and horn with
which it had previously been marked had now been removed. It would be a plain green flag
from now onwards.
He had only one criticism, he said, to make of Mr. Pilkington’s excellent and neighbourly
speech. Mr. Pilkington had referred throughout to “Animal Farm.” He could not of course
know — for he, Napoleon, was only now for the first time announcing it — that the name
“Animal Farm” had been abolished. Henceforward the farm was to be known as “The Manor
Farm”— which, he believed, was its correct and original name.
“Gentlemen,” concluded Napoleon, “I will give you the same toast as before, but in a
different form. Fill your glasses to the brim. Gentlemen, here is my toast: To the prosperity of
The Manor Farm!”
There was the same hearty cheering as before, and the mugs were emptied to the dregs. But
as the animals outside gazed at the scene, it seemed to them that some strange thing was
happening. What was it that had altered in the faces of the pigs? Clover’s old dim eyes flitted
from one face to another. Some of them had five chins, some had four, some had three. But
what was it that seemed to be melting and changing? Then, the applause having come to an
end, the company took up their cards and continued the game that had been interrupted, and
the animals crept silently away.
But they had not gone twenty yards when they stopped short. An uproar of voices was
coming from the farmhouse. They rushed back and looked through the window again. Yes, a
violent quarrel was in progress. There were shoutings, bangings on the table, sharp suspicious
glances, furious denials. The source of the trouble appeared to be that Napoleon and Mr.
Pilkington had each played an ace of spades simultaneously.
Twelve voices were shouting in anger, and they were all alike. No question, now, what had
happened to the faces of the pigs. The creatures outside looked from pig to man, and from
man to pig, and from pig to man again; but already it was impossible to say which was which.
The artist is the creator of beautiful things. To reveal art and conceal the artist is art’s aim. The critic is he who can translate into another manner or a new material his impression of beautiful things.
The highest as the lowest form of criticism is a mode of autobiography. Those who find ugly meanings in beautiful things are corrupt without being charming. This is a fault.
Those who find beautiful meanings in beautiful things are the cultivated. For these there is hope. They are the elect to whom beautiful things mean only beauty.
There is no such thing as a moral or an immoral book. Books are well written, or badly written. That is all.
The nineteenth century dislike of realism is the rage of Caliban seeing his own face in a glass.
The nineteenth century dislike of romanticism is the rage of Caliban not seeing his own face in a glass. The moral life of man forms part of the subject-matter of the artist, but the morality of art consists in the perfect use of an imperfect medium. No artist desires to prove anything. Even things that are true can be proved. No artist has ethical sympathies. An ethical sympathy in an artist is an unpardonable mannerism of style. No artist is ever morbid. The artist can express everything. Thought and language are to the artist instruments of an art. Vice and virtue are to the artist materials for an art. From the point of view of form, the type of all the arts is the art of the musician. From the point of view of feeling, the actor’s craft is the type. All art is at once surface and symbol. Those who go beneath the surface do so at their peril. Those who read the symbol do so at their peril. It is the spectator, and not life, that art really mirrors. Diversity of opinion about a work of art shows that the work is new, complex, and vital. When critics disagree, the artist is in accord with himself. We can forgive a man for making a useful thing as long as he does not admire it. The only excuse for making a useless thing is that one admires it intensely.
All art is quite useless.
The studio was filled with the rich odour of roses, and when the light summer wind stirred amidst the trees of the garden, there came through the open door the heavy scent of the lilac, or the more delicate perfume of the pink-flowering thorn.

From the corner of the divan of Persian saddle-bags on which he was lying, smoking, as was his custom, innumerable cigarettes, Lord Henry Wotton could just catch the gleam of the honey-sweet and honey-coloured blossoms of a laburnum, whose tremulous branches seemed hardly able to bear the burden of a beauty so flamelike as theirs; and now and then the fantastic shadows of birds in flight flitted across the long tussore-silk curtains that were stretched in front of the huge window, producing a kind of momentary Japanese effect, and making him think of those pallid, jade-faced painters of Tokyo who, through the medium of an art that is necessarily immobile, seek to convey the sense of swiftness and motion. The sullen murmur of the bees shouldering their way through the long unmown grass, or circling with monotonous insistence round the dusty gilt horns of the straggling woodbine, seemed to make the stillness more oppressive. The dim roar of London was like the bourdon note of a distant organ.

In the centre of the room, clamped to an upright easel, stood the full-length portrait of a young man of extraordinary personal beauty, and in front of it, some little distance away, was sitting the artist himself, Basil Hallward, whose sudden disappearance some years ago caused, at the time, such public excitement and gave rise to so many strange conjectures.

As the painter looked at the gracious and comely form he had so skilfully mirrored in his art, a smile of pleasure passed across his face, and seemed about to linger there. But he suddenly started up, and closing his eyes, placed his fingers upon the lids, as though he sought to imprison within his brain some curious dream from which he feared he might awake.

“It is your best work, Basil, the best thing you have ever done,” said Lord Henry languidly. “You must certainly send it next year to the Grosvenor. The Academy is too large and too vulgar. Whenever I have gone there, there have been either so many people that I have not been able to see the pictures, which was dreadful, or so many pictures that I have not been able to see the people, which was worse. The Grosvenor is really the only place.”

“I don’t think I shall send it anywhere,” he answered, tossing his head back in that odd way that used to make his friends laugh at him at Oxford. “No, I won’t send it anywhere.”

Lord Henry elevated his eyebrows and looked at him in amazement through the thin blue wreaths of smoke that curled up in such fanciful whorls from his heavy, opium-tainted cigarette. “Not send it anywhere? My dear fellow, why? Have you any reason? What odd chaps you painters are! You do anything in the world to gain a reputation. As soon as you have one, you seem to want to throw it away. It is silly of you, for there is only one thing in the world worse than being talked about, and that is not being talked about. A portrait like this would set you far above all the young men in England, and make the old men quite jealous, if old men are ever capable of any emotion.”

“I know you will laugh at me,” he replied, “but I really can’t exhibit it. I have put too much of myself into it.”

Lord Henry stretched himself out on the divan and laughed.

“Yes, I knew you would; but it is quite true, all the same.”

“Too much of yourself in it! Upon my word, Basil, I didn’t know you were so vain; and I really can’t see any resemblance between you, with your rugged strong face and your coal-black hair, and this young Adonis, who looks as if he was made out of ivory and rose-leaves. Why, my dear Basil, he is a Narcissus, and you—well, of course you have an intellectual expression and all that. But beauty, real beauty, ends where an intellectual expression begins. Intellect is in itself a mode of exaggeration, and destroys the harmony of any face. The moment one sits down to think, one becomes all nose, or all forehead, or something horrid. Look at the successful men in any of the learned professions. How perfectly hideous they are! Except, of course, in the Church. But then in the Church they don’t think. A bishop keeps on saying at the age of eighty what he was told to say when he was a boy of eighteen, and as a natural consequence he always looks absolutely delightful. Your mysterious young friend, whose name you have never told me, but whose picture really fascinates me, never thinks. I feel quite sure of that. He is some brainless beautiful creature who should be always here in winter when we have no flowers to look at, and always here in summer when we want something to chill our intelligence. Don’t flatter yourself, Basil: you are not in the least like him.”

“You don’t understand me, Harry,” answered the artist. “Of course I am not like him. I know that perfectly well. Indeed, I should be sorry to look like him. You shrug your shoulders? I am telling you the truth. There is a fatality about all physical and intellectual distinction, the sort of fatality that seems to dog through history the faltering steps of kings. It is better not to be different from one’s fellows. The ugly and the stupid have the best of it in this world. They can sit at their ease and gape at the play. If they know nothing of victory, they are at least spared the knowledge of defeat. They live as we all should live—undisturbed, indifferent, and without disquiet. They neither bring ruin upon others, nor ever receive it from alien hands. Your rank and wealth, Harry; my brains, such as they are—my art, whatever it may be worth; Dorian Gray’s good looks—we shall all suffer for what the gods have given us, suffer terribly.”

“Dorian Gray? Is that his name?” asked Lord Henry, walking across the studio towards Basil Hallward.

“Yes, that is his name. I didn’t intend to tell it to you.”

“But why not?”

“Oh, I can’t explain. When I like people immensely, I never tell their names to any one. It is like surrendering a part of them. I have grown to love secrecy. It seems to be the one thing that can make modern life mysterious or marvellous to us. The commonest thing is delightful if one only hides it. When I leave town now I never tell my people where I am going. If I did, I would lose all my pleasure. It is a silly habit, I dare say, but somehow it seems to bring a great deal of romance into one’s life. I suppose you think me awfully foolish about it?”

“Not at all,” answered Lord Henry, “not at all, my dear Basil. You seem to forget that I am married, and the one charm of marriage is that it makes a life of deception absolutely necessary for both parties. I never know where my wife is, and my wife never knows what I am doing. When we meet—we do meet occasionally, when we dine out together, or go down to the Duke’s—we tell each other the most absurd stories with the most serious faces. My wife is very good at it—much better, in fact, than I am. She never gets confused over her dates, and I always do. But when she does find me out, she makes no row at all. I sometimes wish she would; but she merely laughs at me.”

“I hate the way you talk about your married life, Harry,” said Basil Hallward, strolling towards the door that led into the garden. “I believe that you are really a very good husband, but that you are thoroughly ashamed of your own virtues. You are an extraordinary fellow. You never say a moral thing, and you never do a wrong thing. Your cynicism is simply a pose.”

“Being natural is simply a pose, and the most irritating pose I know,” cried Lord Henry, laughing; and the two young men went out into the garden together and ensconced themselves on a long bamboo seat that stood in the shade of a tall laurel bush. The sunlight slipped over the polished leaves. In the grass, white daisies were tremulous.

After a pause, Lord Henry pulled out his watch. “I am afraid I must be going, Basil,” he murmured, “and before I go, I insist on your answering a question I put to you some time ago.”

“What is that?” said the painter, keeping his eyes fixed on the ground.

“You know quite well.”

“I do not, Harry.”

“Well, I will tell you what it is. I want you to explain to me why you won’t exhibit Dorian Gray’s picture. I want the real reason.”

“I told you the real reason.”

“No, you did not. You said it was because there was too much of yourself in it. Now, that is childish.”

“Harry,” said Basil Hallward, looking him straight in the face, “every portrait that is painted with feeling is a portrait of the artist, not of the sitter. The sitter is merely the accident, the occasion. It is not he who is revealed by the painter; it is rather the painter who, on the coloured canvas, reveals himself. The reason I will not exhibit this picture is that I am afraid that I have shown in it the secret of my own soul.”

Lord Henry laughed. “And what is that?” he asked.

“I will tell you,” said Hallward; but an expression of perplexity came over his face.

“I am all expectation, Basil,” continued his companion, glancing at him.

“Oh, there is really very little to tell, Harry,” answered the painter; “and I am afraid you will hardly understand it. Perhaps you will hardly believe it.”

Lord Henry smiled, and leaning down, plucked a pink-petalled daisy from the grass and examined it. “I am quite sure I shall understand it,” he replied, gazing intently at the little golden, white-feathered disk, “and as for believing things, I can believe anything, provided that it is quite incredible.”

The wind shook some blossoms from the trees, and the heavy lilac-blooms, with their clustering stars, moved to and fro in the languid air. A grasshopper began to chirrup by the wall, and like a blue thread a long thin dragon-fly floated past on its brown gauze wings. Lord Henry felt as if he could hear Basil Hallward’s heart beating, and wondered what was coming.

“The story is simply this,” said the painter after some time. “Two months ago I went to a crush at Lady Brandon’s. You know we poor artists have to show ourselves in society from time to time, just to remind the public that we are not savages. With an evening coat and a white tie, as you told me once, anybody, even a stock-broker, can gain a reputation for being civilized. Well, after I had been in the room about ten minutes, talking to huge overdressed dowagers and tedious academicians, I suddenly became conscious that some one was looking at me. I turned half-way round and saw Dorian Gray for the first time. When our eyes met, I felt that I was growing pale. A curious sensation of terror came over me. I knew that I had come face to face with some one whose mere personality was so fascinating that, if I allowed it to do so, it would absorb my whole nature, my whole soul, my very art itself. I did not want any external influence in my life. You know yourself, Harry, how independent I am by nature. I have always been my own master; had at least always been so, till I met Dorian Gray. Then—but I don’t know how to explain it to you. Something seemed to tell me that I was on the verge of a terrible crisis in my life. I had a strange feeling that fate had in store for me exquisite joys and exquisite sorrows. I grew afraid and turned to quit the room. It was not conscience that made me do so: it was a sort of cowardice. I take no credit to myself for trying to escape.”

“Conscience and cowardice are really the same things, Basil. Conscience is the trade-name of the firm. That is all.”

“I don’t believe that, Harry, and I don’t believe you do either. However, whatever was my motive—and it may have been pride, for I used to be very proud—I certainly struggled to the door. There, of course, I stumbled against Lady Brandon. ‘You are not going to run away so soon, Mr. Hallward?’ she screamed out. You know her curiously shrill voice?”

“Yes; she is a peacock in everything but beauty,” said Lord Henry, pulling the daisy to bits with his long nervous fingers.

“I could not get rid of her. She brought me up to royalties, and people with stars and garters, and elderly ladies with gigantic tiaras and parrot noses. She spoke of me as her dearest friend. I had only met her once before, but she took it into her head to lionize me. I believe some picture of mine had made a great success at the time, at least had been chattered about in the penny newspapers, which is the nineteenth-century standard of immortality. Suddenly I found myself face to face with the young man whose personality had so strangely stirred me. We were quite close, almost touching. Our eyes met again. It was reckless of me, but I asked Lady Brandon to introduce me to him. Perhaps it was not so reckless, after all. It was simply inevitable. We would have spoken to each other without any introduction. I am sure of that. Dorian told me so afterwards. He, too, felt that we were destined to know each other.”

“And how did Lady Brandon describe this wonderful young man?” asked his companion. “I know she goes in for giving a rapid précis of all her guests. I remember her bringing me up to a truculent and red-faced old gentleman covered all over with orders and ribbons, and hissing into my ear, in a tragic whisper which must have been perfectly audible to everybody in the room, the most astounding details. I simply fled. I like to find out people for myself. But Lady Brandon treats her guests exactly as an auctioneer treats his goods. She either explains them entirely away, or tells one everything about them except what one wants to know.”

“Poor Lady Brandon! You are hard on her, Harry!” said Hallward listlessly.

“My dear fellow, she tried to found a salon, and only succeeded in opening a restaurant. How could I admire her? But tell me, what did she say about Mr. Dorian Gray?”

“Oh, something like, ‘Charming boy—poor dear mother and I absolutely inseparable. Quite forget what he does—afraid he—doesn’t do anything—oh, yes, plays the piano—or is it the violin, dear Mr. Gray?’ Neither of us could help laughing, and we became friends at once.”

“Laughter is not at all a bad beginning for a friendship, and it is far the best ending for one,” said the young lord, plucking another daisy.

Hallward shook his head. “You don’t understand what friendship is, Harry,” he murmured—“or what enmity is, for that matter. You like every one; that is to say, you are indifferent to every one.”

“How horribly unjust of you!” cried Lord Henry, tilting his hat back and looking up at the little clouds that, like ravelled skeins of glossy white silk, were drifting across the hollowed turquoise of the summer sky. “Yes; horribly unjust of you. I make a great difference between people. I choose my friends for their good looks, my acquaintances for their good characters, and my enemies for their good intellects. A man cannot be too careful in the choice of his enemies. I have not got one who is a fool. They are all men of some intellectual power, and consequently they all appreciate me. Is that very vain of me? I think it is rather vain.”

“I should think it was, Harry. But according to your category I must be merely an acquaintance.”

“My dear old Basil, you are much more than an acquaintance.”

“And much less than a friend. A sort of brother, I suppose?”

“Oh, brothers! I don’t care for brothers. My elder brother won’t die, and my younger brothers seem never to do anything else.”

“Harry!” exclaimed Hallward, frowning.

“My dear fellow, I am not quite serious. But I can’t help detesting my relations. I suppose it comes from the fact that none of us can stand other people having the same faults as ourselves. I quite sympathize with the rage of the English democracy against what they call the vices of the upper orders. The masses feel that drunkenness, stupidity, and immorality should be their own special property, and that if any one of us makes an ass of himself, he is poaching on their preserves. When poor Southwark got into the divorce court, their indignation was quite magnificent. And yet I don’t suppose that ten per cent of the proletariat live correctly.”

“I don’t agree with a single word that you have said, and, what is more, Harry, I feel sure you don’t either.”

Lord Henry stroked his pointed brown beard and tapped the toe of his patent-leather boot with a tasselled ebony cane. “How English you are Basil! That is the second time you have made that observation. If one puts forward an idea to a true Englishman—always a rash thing to do—he never dreams of considering whether the idea is right or wrong. The only thing he considers of any importance is whether one believes it oneself. Now, the value of an idea has nothing whatsoever to do with the sincerity of the man who expresses it. Indeed, the probabilities are that the more insincere the man is, the more purely intellectual will the idea be, as in that case it will not be coloured by either his wants, his desires, or his prejudices. However, I don’t propose to discuss politics, sociology, or metaphysics with you. I like persons better than principles, and I like persons with no principles better than anything else in the world. Tell me more about Mr. Dorian Gray. How often do you see him?”

“Every day. I couldn’t be happy if I didn’t see him every day. He is absolutely necessary to me.”

“How extraordinary! I thought you would never care for anything but your art.”

“He is all my art to me now,” said the painter gravely. “I sometimes think, Harry, that there are only two eras of any importance in the world’s history. The first is the appearance of a new medium for art, and the second is the appearance of a new personality for art also. What the invention of oil-painting was to the Venetians, the face of Antinous was to late Greek sculpture, and the face of Dorian Gray will some day be to me. It is not merely that I paint from him, draw from him, sketch from him. Of course, I have done all that. But he is much more to me than a model or a sitter. I won’t tell you that I am dissatisfied with what I have done of him, or that his beauty is such that art cannot express it. There is nothing that art cannot express, and I know that the work I have done, since I met Dorian Gray, is good work, is the best work of my life. But in some curious way—I wonder will you understand me?—his personality has suggested to me an entirely new manner in art, an entirely new mode of style. I see things differently, I think of them differently. I can now recreate life in a way that was hidden from me before. ‘A dream of form in days of thought’—who is it who says that? I forget; but it is what Dorian Gray has been to me. The merely visible presence of this lad—for he seems to me little more than a lad, though he is really over twenty—his merely visible presence—ah! I wonder can you realize all that that means? Unconsciously he defines for me the lines of a fresh school, a school that is to have in it all the passion of the romantic spirit, all the perfection of the spirit that is Greek. The harmony of soul and body—how much that is! We in our madness have separated the two, and have invented a realism that is vulgar, an ideality that is void. Harry! if you only knew what Dorian Gray is to me! You remember that landscape of mine, for which Agnew offered me such a huge price but which I would not part with? It is one of the best things I have ever done. And why is it so? Because, while I was painting it, Dorian Gray sat beside me. Some subtle influence passed from him to me, and for the first time in my life I saw in the plain woodland the wonder I had always looked for and always missed.”

“Basil, this is extraordinary! I must see Dorian Gray.”

Hallward got up from the seat and walked up and down the garden. After some time he came back. “Harry,” he said, “Dorian Gray is to me simply a motive in art. You might see nothing in him. I see everything in him. He is never more present in my work than when no image of him is there. He is a suggestion, as I have said, of a new manner. I find him in the curves of certain lines, in the loveliness and subtleties of certain colours. That is all.”

“Then why won’t you exhibit his portrait?” asked Lord Henry.

“Because, without intending it, I have put into it some expression of all this curious artistic idolatry, of which, of course, I have never cared to speak to him. He knows nothing about it. He shall never know anything about it. But the world might guess it, and I will not bare my soul to their shallow prying eyes. My heart shall never be put under their microscope. There is too much of myself in the thing, Harry—too much of myself!”

“Poets are not so scrupulous as you are. They know how useful passion is for publication. Nowadays a broken heart will run to many editions.”

“I hate them for it,” cried Hallward. “An artist should create beautiful things, but should put nothing of his own life into them. We live in an age when men treat art as if it were meant to be a form of autobiography. We have lost the abstract sense of beauty. Some day I will show the world what it is; and for that reason the world shall never see my portrait of Dorian Gray.”

“I think you are wrong, Basil, but I won’t argue with you. It is only the intellectually lost who ever argue. Tell me, is Dorian Gray very fond of you?”

The painter considered for a few moments. “He likes me,” he answered after a pause; “I know he likes me. Of course I flatter him dreadfully. I find a strange pleasure in saying things to him that I know I shall be sorry for having said. As a rule, he is charming to me, and we sit in the studio and talk of a thousand things. Now and then, however, he is horribly thoughtless, and seems to take a real delight in giving me pain. Then I feel, Harry, that I have given away my whole soul to some one who treats it as if it were a flower to put in his coat, a bit of decoration to charm his vanity, an ornament for a summer’s day.”

“Days in summer, Basil, are apt to linger,” murmured Lord Henry. “Perhaps you will tire sooner than he will. It is a sad thing to think of, but there is no doubt that genius lasts longer than beauty. That accounts for the fact that we all take such pains to over-educate ourselves. In the wild struggle for existence, we want to have something that endures, and so we fill our minds with rubbish and facts, in the silly hope of keeping our place. The thoroughly well-informed man—that is the modern ideal. And the mind of the thoroughly well-informed man is a dreadful thing. It is like a bric-à-brac shop, all monsters and dust, with everything priced above its proper value. I think you will tire first, all the same. Some day you will look at your friend, and he will seem to you to be a little out of drawing, or you won’t like his tone of colour, or something. You will bitterly reproach him in your own heart, and seriously think that he has behaved very badly to you. The next time he calls, you will be perfectly cold and indifferent. It will be a great pity, for it will alter you. What you have told me is quite a romance, a romance of art one might call it, and the worst of having a romance of any kind is that it leaves one so unromantic.”

“Harry, don’t talk like that. As long as I live, the personality of Dorian Gray will dominate me. You can’t feel what I feel. You change too often.”

“Ah, my dear Basil, that is exactly why I can feel it. Those who are faithful know only the trivial side of love: it is the faithless who know love’s tragedies.” And Lord Henry struck a light on a dainty silver case and began to smoke a cigarette with a self-conscious and satisfied air, as if he had summed up the world in a phrase. There was a rustle of chirruping sparrows in the green lacquer leaves of the ivy, and the blue cloud-shadows chased themselves across the grass like swallows. How pleasant it was in the garden! And how delightful other people’s emotions were!—much more delightful than their ideas, it seemed to him. One’s own soul, and the passions of one’s friends—those were the fascinating things in life. He pictured to himself with silent amusement the tedious luncheon that he had missed by staying so long with Basil Hallward. Had he gone to his aunt’s, he would have been sure to have met Lord Goodbody there, and the whole conversation would have been about the feeding of the poor and the necessity for model lodging-houses. Each class would have preached the importance of those virtues, for whose exercise there was no necessity in their own lives. The rich would have spoken on the value of thrift, and the idle grown eloquent over the dignity of labour. It was charming to have escaped all that! As he thought of his aunt, an idea seemed to strike him. He turned to Hallward and said, “My dear fellow, I have just remembered.”

“Remembered what, Harry?”

“Where I heard the name of Dorian Gray.”

“Where was it?” asked Hallward, with a slight frown.

“Don’t look so angry, Basil. It was at my aunt, Lady Agatha’s. She told me she had discovered a wonderful young man who was going to help her in the East End, and that his name was Dorian Gray. I am bound to state that she never told me he was good-looking. Women have no appreciation of good looks; at least, good women have not. She said that he was very earnest and had a beautiful nature. I at once pictured to myself a creature with spectacles and lank hair, horribly freckled, and tramping about on huge feet. I wish I had known it was your friend.”

“I am very glad you didn’t, Harry.”

“Why?”

“I don’t want you to meet him.”

“You don’t want me to meet him?”

“No.”

“Mr. Dorian Gray is in the studio, sir,” said the butler, coming into the garden.

“You must introduce me now,” cried Lord Henry, laughing.

The painter turned to his servant, who stood blinking in the sunlight. “Ask Mr. Gray to wait, Parker: I shall be in in a few moments.” The man bowed and went up the walk.

Then he looked at Lord Henry. “Dorian Gray is my dearest friend,” he said. “He has a simple and a beautiful nature. Your aunt was quite right in what she said of him. Don’t spoil him. Don’t try to influence him. Your influence would be bad. The world is wide, and has many marvellous people in it. Don’t take away from me the one person who gives to my art whatever charm it possesses: my life as an artist depends on him. Mind, Harry, I trust you.” He spoke very slowly, and the words seemed wrung out of him almost against his will.

“What nonsense you talk!” said Lord Henry, smiling, and taking Hallward by the arm, he almost led him into the house.

As they entered they saw Dorian Gray. He was seated at the piano, with his back to them, turning over the pages of a volume of Schumann’s “Forest Scenes.” “You must lend me these, Basil,” he cried. “I want to learn them. They are perfectly charming.”

“That entirely depends on how you sit to-day, Dorian.”

“Oh, I am tired of sitting, and I don’t want a life-sized portrait of myself,” answered the lad, swinging round on the music-stool in a wilful, petulant manner. When he caught sight of Lord Henry, a faint blush coloured his cheeks for a moment, and he started up. “I beg your pardon, Basil, but I didn’t know you had any one with you.”

“This is Lord Henry Wotton, Dorian, an old Oxford friend of mine. I have just been telling him what a capital sitter you were, and now you have spoiled everything.”

“You have not spoiled my pleasure in meeting you, Mr. Gray,” said Lord Henry, stepping forward and extending his hand. “My aunt has often spoken to me about you. You are one of her favourites, and, I am afraid, one of her victims also.”

“I am in Lady Agatha’s black books at present,” answered Dorian with a funny look of penitence. “I promised to go to a club in Whitechapel with her last Tuesday, and I really forgot all about it. We were to have played a duet together—three duets, I believe. I don’t know what she will say to me. I am far too frightened to call.”

“Oh, I will make your peace with my aunt. She is quite devoted to you. And I don’t think it really matters about your not being there. The audience probably thought it was a duet. When Aunt Agatha sits down to the piano, she makes quite enough noise for two people.”

“That is very horrid to her, and not very nice to me,” answered Dorian, laughing.

Lord Henry looked at him. Yes, he was certainly wonderfully handsome, with his finely curved scarlet lips, his frank blue eyes, his crisp gold hair. There was something in his face that made one trust him at once. All the candour of youth was there, as well as all youth’s passionate purity. One felt that he had kept himself unspotted from the world. No wonder Basil Hallward worshipped him.

“You are too charming to go in for philanthropy, Mr. Gray—far too charming.” And Lord Henry flung himself down on the divan and opened his cigarette-case.

The painter had been busy mixing his colours and getting his brushes ready. He was looking worried, and when he heard Lord Henry’s last remark, he glanced at him, hesitated for a moment, and then said, “Harry, I want to finish this picture to-day. Would you think it awfully rude of me if I asked you to go away?”

Lord Henry smiled and looked at Dorian Gray. “Am I to go, Mr. Gray?” he asked.

“Oh, please don’t, Lord Henry. I see that Basil is in one of his sulky moods, and I can’t bear him when he sulks. Besides, I want you to tell me why I should not go in for philanthropy.”

“I don’t know that I shall tell you that, Mr. Gray. It is so tedious a subject that one would have to talk seriously about it. But I certainly shall not run away, now that you have asked me to stop. You don’t really mind, Basil, do you? You have often told me that you liked your sitters to have some one to chat to.”

Hallward bit his lip. “If Dorian wishes it, of course you must stay. Dorian’s whims are laws to everybody, except himself.”

Lord Henry took up his hat and gloves. “You are very pressing, Basil, but I am afraid I must go. I have promised to meet a man at the Orleans. Good-bye, Mr. Gray. Come and see me some afternoon in Curzon Street. I am nearly always at home at five o’clock. Write to me when you are coming. I should be sorry to miss you.”

“Basil,” cried Dorian Gray, “if Lord Henry Wotton goes, I shall go, too. You never open your lips while you are painting, and it is horribly dull standing on a platform and trying to look pleasant. Ask him to stay. I insist upon it.”

“Stay, Harry, to oblige Dorian, and to oblige me,” said Hallward, gazing intently at his picture. “It is quite true, I never talk when I am working, and never listen either, and it must be dreadfully tedious for my unfortunate sitters. I beg you to stay.”

“But what about my man at the Orleans?”

The painter laughed. “I don’t think there will be any difficulty about that. Sit down again, Harry. And now, Dorian, get up on the platform, and don’t move about too much, or pay any attention to what Lord Henry says. He has a very bad influence over all his friends, with the single exception of myself.”

Dorian Gray stepped up on the dais with the air of a young Greek martyr, and made a little moue of discontent to Lord Henry, to whom he had rather taken a fancy. He was so unlike Basil. They made a delightful contrast. And he had such a beautiful voice. After a few moments he said to him, “Have you really a very bad influence, Lord Henry? As bad as Basil says?”

“There is no such thing as a good influence, Mr. Gray. All influence is immoral—immoral from the scientific point of view.”

“Why?”

“Because to influence a person is to give him one’s own soul. He does not think his natural thoughts, or burn with his natural passions. His virtues are not real to him. His sins, if there are such things as sins, are borrowed. He becomes an echo of some one else’s music, an actor of a part that has not been written for him. The aim of life is self-development. To realize one’s nature perfectly—that is what each of us is here for. People are afraid of themselves, nowadays. They have forgotten the highest of all duties, the duty that one owes to one’s self. Of course, they are charitable. They feed the hungry and clothe the beggar. But their own souls starve, and are naked. Courage has gone out of our race. Perhaps we never really had it. The terror of society, which is the basis of morals, the terror of God, which is the secret of religion—these are the two things that govern us. And yet—”

“Just turn your head a little more to the right, Dorian, like a good boy,” said the painter, deep in his work and conscious only that a look had come into the lad’s face that he had never seen there before.

“And yet,” continued Lord Henry, in his low, musical voice, and with that graceful wave of the hand that was always so characteristic of him, and that he had even in his Eton days, “I believe that if one man were to live out his life fully and completely, were to give form to every feeling, expression to every thought, reality to every dream—I believe that the world would gain such a fresh impulse of joy that we would forget all the maladies of mediævalism, and return to the Hellenic ideal—to something finer, richer than the Hellenic ideal, it may be. But the bravest man amongst us is afraid of himself. The mutilation of the savage has its tragic survival in the self-denial that mars our lives. We are punished for our refusals. Every impulse that we strive to strangle broods in the mind and poisons us. The body sins once, and has done with its sin, for action is a mode of purification. Nothing remains then but the recollection of a pleasure, or the luxury of a regret. The only way to get rid of a temptation is to yield to it. Resist it, and your soul grows sick with longing for the things it has forbidden to itself, with desire for what its monstrous laws have made monstrous and unlawful. It has been said that the great events of the world take place in the brain. It is in the brain, and the brain only, that the great sins of the world take place also. You, Mr. Gray, you yourself, with your rose-red youth and your rose-white boyhood, you have had passions that have made you afraid, thoughts that have filled you with terror, day-dreams and sleeping dreams whose mere memory might stain your cheek with shame—”

“Stop!” faltered Dorian Gray, “stop! you bewilder me. I don’t know what to say. There is some answer to you, but I cannot find it. Don’t speak. Let me think. Or, rather, let me try not to think.”

For nearly ten minutes he stood there, motionless, with parted lips and eyes strangely bright. He was dimly conscious that entirely fresh influences were at work within him. Yet they seemed to him to have come really from himself. The few words that Basil’s friend had said to him—words spoken by chance, no doubt, and with wilful paradox in them—had touched some secret chord that had never been touched before, but that he felt was now vibrating and throbbing to curious pulses.

Music had stirred him like that. Music had troubled him many times. But music was not articulate. It was not a new world, but rather another chaos, that it created in us. Words! Mere words! How terrible they were! How clear, and vivid, and cruel! One could not escape from them. And yet what a subtle magic there was in them! They seemed to be able to give a plastic form to formless things, and to have a music of their own as sweet as that of viol or of lute. Mere words! Was there anything so real as words?

Yes; there had been things in his boyhood that he had not understood. He understood them now. Life suddenly became fiery-coloured to him. It seemed to him that he had been walking in fire. Why had he not known it?

With his subtle smile, Lord Henry watched him. He knew the precise psychological moment when to say nothing. He felt intensely interested. He was amazed at the sudden impression that his words had produced, and, remembering a book that he had read when he was sixteen, a book which had revealed to him much that he had not known before, he wondered whether Dorian Gray was passing through a similar experience. He had merely shot an arrow into the air. Had it hit the mark? How fascinating the lad was!

Hallward painted away with that marvellous bold touch of his, that had the true refinement and perfect delicacy that in art, at any rate comes only from strength. He was unconscious of the silence.

“Basil, I am tired of standing,” cried Dorian Gray suddenly. “I must go out and sit in the garden. The air is stifling here.”

“My dear fellow, I am so sorry. When I am painting, I can’t think of anything else. But you never sat better. You were perfectly still. And I have caught the effect I wanted—the half-parted lips and the bright look in the eyes. I don’t know what Harry has been saying to you, but he has certainly made you have the most wonderful expression. I suppose he has been paying you compliments. You mustn’t believe a word that he says.”

“He has certainly not been paying me compliments. Perhaps that is the reason that I don’t believe anything he has told me.”

“You know you believe it all,” said Lord Henry, looking at him with his dreamy languorous eyes. “I will go out to the garden with you. It is horribly hot in the studio. Basil, let us have something iced to drink, something with strawberries in it.”

“Certainly, Harry. Just touch the bell, and when Parker comes I will tell him what you want. I have got to work up this background, so I will join you later on. Don’t keep Dorian too long. I have never been in better form for painting than I am to-day. This is going to be my masterpiece. It is my masterpiece as it stands.”

Lord Henry went out to the garden and found Dorian Gray burying his face in the great cool lilac-blossoms, feverishly drinking in their perfume as if it had been wine. He came close to him and put his hand upon his shoulder. “You are quite right to do that,” he murmured. “Nothing can cure the soul but the senses, just as nothing can cure the senses but the soul.”

The lad started and drew back. He was bareheaded, and the leaves had tossed his rebellious curls and tangled all their gilded threads. There was a look of fear in his eyes, such as people have when they are suddenly awakened. His finely chiselled nostrils quivered, and some hidden nerve shook the scarlet of his lips and left them trembling.

“Yes,” continued Lord Henry, “that is one of the great secrets of life—to cure the soul by means of the senses, and the senses by means of the soul. You are a wonderful creation. You know more than you think you know, just as you know less than you want to know.”

Dorian Gray frowned and turned his head away. He could not help liking the tall, graceful young man who was standing by him. His romantic, olive-coloured face and worn expression interested him. There was something in his low languid voice that was absolutely fascinating. His cool, white, flowerlike hands, even, had a curious charm. They moved, as he spoke, like music, and seemed to have a language of their own. But he felt afraid of him, and ashamed of being afraid. Why had it been left for a stranger to reveal him to himself? He had known Basil Hallward for months, but the friendship between them had never altered him. Suddenly there had come some one across his life who seemed to have disclosed to him life’s mystery. And, yet, what was there to be afraid of? He was not a schoolboy or a girl. It was absurd to be frightened.

“Let us go and sit in the shade,” said Lord Henry. “Parker has brought out the drinks, and if you stay any longer in this glare, you will be quite spoiled, and Basil will never paint you again. You really must not allow yourself to become sunburnt. It would be unbecoming.”

“What can it matter?” cried Dorian Gray, laughing, as he sat down on the seat at the end of the garden.

“It should matter everything to you, Mr. Gray.”

“Why?”

“Because you have the most marvellous youth, and youth is the one thing worth having.”

“I don’t feel that, Lord Henry.”

“No, you don’t feel it now. Some day, when you are old and wrinkled and ugly, when thought has seared your forehead with its lines, and passion branded your lips with its hideous fires, you will feel it, you will feel it terribly. Now, wherever you go, you charm the world. Will it always be so? ... You have a wonderfully beautiful face, Mr. Gray. Don’t frown. You have. And beauty is a form of genius—is higher, indeed, than genius, as it needs no explanation. It is of the great facts of the world, like sunlight, or spring-time, or the reflection in dark waters of that silver shell we call the moon. It cannot be questioned. It has its divine right of sovereignty. It makes princes of those who have it. You smile? Ah! when you have lost it you won’t smile.... People say sometimes that beauty is only superficial. That may be so, but at least it is not so superficial as thought is. To me, beauty is the wonder of wonders. It is only shallow people who do not judge by appearances. The true mystery of the world is the visible, not the invisible.... Yes, Mr. Gray, the gods have been good to you. But what the gods give they quickly take away. You have only a few years in which to live really, perfectly, and fully. When your youth goes, your beauty will go with it, and then you will suddenly discover that there are no triumphs left for you, or have to content yourself with those mean triumphs that the memory of your past will make more bitter than defeats. Every month as it wanes brings you nearer to something dreadful. Time is jealous of you, and wars against your lilies and your roses. You will become sallow, and hollow-cheeked, and dull-eyed. You will suffer horribly.... Ah! realize your youth while you have it. Don’t squander the gold of your days, listening to the tedious, trying to improve the hopeless failure, or giving away your life to the ignorant, the common, and the vulgar. These are the sickly aims, the false ideals, of our age. Live! Live the wonderful life that is in you! Let nothing be lost upon you. Be always searching for new sensations. Be afraid of nothing.... A new Hedonism—that is what our century wants. You might be its visible symbol. With your personality there is nothing you could not do. The world belongs to you for a season.... The moment I met you I saw that you were quite unconscious of what you really are, of what you really might be. There was so much in you that charmed me that I felt I must tell you something about yourself. I thought how tragic it would be if you were wasted. For there is such a little time that your youth will last—such a little time. The common hill-flowers wither, but they blossom again. The laburnum will be as yellow next June as it is now. In a month there will be purple stars on the clematis, and year after year the green night of its leaves will hold its purple stars. But we never get back our youth. The pulse of joy that beats in us at twenty becomes sluggish. Our limbs fail, our senses rot. We degenerate into hideous puppets, haunted by the memory of the passions of which we were too much afraid, and the exquisite temptations that we had not the courage to yield to. Youth! Youth! There is absolutely nothing in the world but youth!”

Dorian Gray listened, open-eyed and wondering. The spray of lilac fell from his hand upon the gravel. A furry bee came and buzzed round it for a moment. Then it began to scramble all over the oval stellated globe of the tiny blossoms. He watched it with that strange interest in trivial things that we try to develop when things of high import make us afraid, or when we are stirred by some new emotion for which we cannot find expression, or when some thought that terrifies us lays sudden siege to the brain and calls on us to yield. After a time the bee flew away. He saw it creeping into the stained trumpet of a Tyrian convolvulus. The flower seemed to quiver, and then swayed gently to and fro.

Suddenly the painter appeared at the door of the studio and made staccato signs for them to come in. They turned to each other and smiled.

“I am waiting,” he cried. “Do come in. The light is quite perfect, and you can bring your drinks.”

They rose up and sauntered down the walk together. Two green-and-white butterflies fluttered past them, and in the pear-tree at the corner of the garden a thrush began to sing.

“You are glad you have met me, Mr. Gray,” said Lord Henry, looking at him.

“Yes, I am glad now. I wonder shall I always be glad?”

“Always! That is a dreadful word. It makes me shudder when I hear it. Women are so fond of using it. They spoil every romance by trying to make it last for ever. It is a meaningless word, too. The only difference between a caprice and a lifelong passion is that the caprice lasts a little longer.”

As they entered the studio, Dorian Gray put his hand upon Lord Henry’s arm. “In that case, let our friendship be a caprice,” he murmured, flushing at his own boldness, then stepped up on the platform and resumed his pose.

Lord Henry flung himself into a large wicker arm-chair and watched him. The sweep and dash of the brush on the canvas made the only sound that broke the stillness, except when, now and then, Hallward stepped back to look at his work from a distance. In the slanting beams that streamed through the open doorway the dust danced and was golden. The heavy scent of the roses seemed to brood over everything.

After about a quarter of an hour Hallward stopped painting, looked for a long time at Dorian Gray, and then for a long time at the picture, biting the end of one of his huge brushes and frowning. “It is quite finished,” he cried at last, and stooping down he wrote his name in long vermilion letters on the left-hand corner of the canvas.

Lord Henry came over and examined the picture. It was certainly a wonderful work of art, and a wonderful likeness as well.

“My dear fellow, I congratulate you most warmly,” he said. “It is the finest portrait of modern times. Mr. Gray, come over and look at yourself.”

The lad started, as if awakened from some dream.

“Is it really finished?” he murmured, stepping down from the platform.

“Quite finished,” said the painter. “And you have sat splendidly to-day. I am awfully obliged to you.”

“That is entirely due to me,” broke in Lord Henry. “Isn’t it, Mr. Gray?”

Dorian made no answer, but passed listlessly in front of his picture and turned towards it. When he saw it he drew back, and his cheeks flushed for a moment with pleasure. A look of joy came into his eyes, as if he had recognized himself for the first time. He stood there motionless and in wonder, dimly conscious that Hallward was speaking to him, but not catching the meaning of his words. The sense of his own beauty came on him like a revelation. He had never felt it before. Basil Hallward’s compliments had seemed to him to be merely the charming exaggeration of friendship. He had listened to them, laughed at them, forgotten them. They had not influenced his nature. Then had come Lord Henry Wotton with his strange panegyric on youth, his terrible warning of its brevity. That had stirred him at the time, and now, as he stood gazing at the shadow of his own loveliness, the full reality of the description flashed across him. Yes, there would be a day when his face would be wrinkled and wizen, his eyes dim and colourless, the grace of his figure broken and deformed. The scarlet would pass away from his lips and the gold steal from his hair. The life that was to make his soul would mar his body. He would become dreadful, hideous, and uncouth.

As he thought of it, a sharp pang of pain struck through him like a knife and made each delicate fibre of his nature quiver. His eyes deepened into amethyst, and across them came a mist of tears. He felt as if a hand of ice had been laid upon his heart.

“Don’t you like it?” cried Hallward at last, stung a little by the lad’s silence, not understanding what it meant.

“Of course he likes it,” said Lord Henry. “Who wouldn’t like it? It is one of the greatest things in modern art. I will give you anything you like to ask for it. I must have it.”

“It is not my property, Harry.”

“Whose property is it?”

“Dorian’s, of course,” answered the painter.

“He is a very lucky fellow.”

“How sad it is!” murmured Dorian Gray with his eyes still fixed upon his own portrait. “How sad it is! I shall grow old, and horrible, and dreadful. But this picture will remain always young. It will never be older than this particular day of June.... If it were only the other way! If it were I who was to be always young, and the picture that was to grow old! For that—for that—I would give everything! Yes, there is nothing in the whole world I would not give! I would give my soul for that!”

“You would hardly care for such an arrangement, Basil,” cried Lord Henry, laughing. “It would be rather hard lines on your work.”

“I should object very strongly, Harry,” said Hallward.

Dorian Gray turned and looked at him. “I believe you would, Basil. You like your art better than your friends. I am no more to you than a green bronze figure. Hardly as much, I dare say.”

The painter stared in amazement. It was so unlike Dorian to speak like that. What had happened? He seemed quite angry. His face was flushed and his cheeks burning.

“Yes,” he continued, “I am less to you than your ivory Hermes or your silver Faun. You will like them always. How long will you like me? Till I have my first wrinkle, I suppose. I know, now, that when one loses one’s good looks, whatever they may be, one loses everything. Your picture has taught me that. Lord Henry Wotton is perfectly right. Youth is the only thing worth having. When I find that I am growing old, I shall kill myself.”

Hallward turned pale and caught his hand. “Dorian! Dorian!” he cried, “don’t talk like that. I have never had such a friend as you, and I shall never have such another. You are not jealous of material things, are you?—you who are finer than any of them!”

“I am jealous of everything whose beauty does not die. I am jealous of the portrait you have painted of me. Why should it keep what I must lose? Every moment that passes takes something from me and gives something to it. Oh, if it were only the other way! If the picture could change, and I could be always what I am now! Why did you paint it? It will mock me some day—mock me horribly!” The hot tears welled into his eyes; he tore his hand away and, flinging himself on the divan, he buried his face in the cushions, as though he was praying.

“This is your doing, Harry,” said the painter bitterly.

Lord Henry shrugged his shoulders. “It is the real Dorian Gray—that is all.”

“It is not.”

“If it is not, what have I to do with it?”

“You should have gone away when I asked you,” he muttered.

“I stayed when you asked me,” was Lord Henry’s answer.

“Harry, I can’t quarrel with my two best friends at once, but between you both you have made me hate the finest piece of work I have ever done, and I will destroy it. What is it but canvas and colour? I will not let it come across our three lives and mar them.”

Dorian Gray lifted his golden head from the pillow, and with pallid face and tear-stained eyes, looked at him as he walked over to the deal painting-table that was set beneath the high curtained window. What was he doing there? His fingers were straying about among the litter of tin tubes and dry brushes, seeking for something. Yes, it was for the long palette-knife, with its thin blade of lithe steel. He had found it at last. He was going to rip up the canvas.

With a stifled sob the lad leaped from the couch, and, rushing over to Hallward, tore the knife out of his hand, and flung it to the end of the studio. “Don’t, Basil, don’t!” he cried. “It would be murder!”

“I am glad you appreciate my work at last, Dorian,” said the painter coldly when he had recovered from his surprise. “I never thought you would.”

“Appreciate it? I am in love with it, Basil. It is part of myself. I feel that.”

“Well, as soon as you are dry, you shall be varnished, and framed, and sent home. Then you can do what you like with yourself.” And he walked across the room and rang the bell for tea. “You will have tea, of course, Dorian? And so will you, Harry? Or do you object to such simple pleasures?”

“I adore simple pleasures,” said Lord Henry. “They are the last refuge of the complex. But I don’t like scenes, except on the stage. What absurd fellows you are, both of you! I wonder who it was defined man as a rational animal. It was the most premature definition ever given. Man is many things, but he is not rational. I am glad he is not, after all—though I wish you chaps would not squabble over the picture. You had much better let me have it, Basil. This silly boy doesn’t really want it, and I really do.”

“If you let any one have it but me, Basil, I shall never forgive you!” cried Dorian Gray; “and I don’t allow people to call me a silly boy.”

“You know the picture is yours, Dorian. I gave it to you before it existed.”

“And you know you have been a little silly, Mr. Gray, and that you don’t really object to being reminded that you are extremely young.”

“I should have objected very strongly this morning, Lord Henry.”

“Ah! this morning! You have lived since then.”

There came a knock at the door, and the butler entered with a laden tea-tray and set it down upon a small Japanese table. There was a rattle of cups and saucers and the hissing of a fluted Georgian urn. Two globe-shaped china dishes were brought in by a page. Dorian Gray went over and poured out the tea. The two men sauntered languidly to the table and examined what was under the covers.

“Let us go to the theatre to-night,” said Lord Henry. “There is sure to be something on, somewhere. I have promised to dine at White’s, but it is only with an old friend, so I can send him a wire to say that I am ill, or that I am prevented from coming in consequence of a subsequent engagement. I think that would be a rather nice excuse: it would have all the surprise of candour.”

“It is such a bore putting on one’s dress-clothes,” muttered Hallward. “And, when one has them on, they are so horrid.”

“Yes,” answered Lord Henry dreamily, “the costume of the nineteenth century is detestable. It is so sombre, so depressing. Sin is the only real colour-element left in modern life.”

“You really must not say things like that before Dorian, Harry.”

“Before which Dorian? The one who is pouring out tea for us, or the one in the picture?”

“Before either.”

“I should like to come to the theatre with you, Lord Henry,” said the lad.

“Then you shall come; and you will come, too, Basil, won’t you?”

“I can’t, really. I would sooner not. I have a lot of work to do.”

“Well, then, you and I will go alone, Mr. Gray.”

“I should like that awfully.”

The painter bit his lip and walked over, cup in hand, to the picture. “I shall stay with the real Dorian,” he said, sadly.

“Is it the real Dorian?” cried the original of the portrait, strolling across to him. “Am I really like that?”

“Yes; you are just like that.”

“How wonderful, Basil!”

“At least you are like it in appearance. But it will never alter,” sighed Hallward. “That is something.”

“What a fuss people make about fidelity!” exclaimed Lord Henry. “Why, even in love it is purely a question for physiology. It has nothing to do with our own will. Young men want to be faithful, and are not; old men want to be faithless, and cannot: that is all one can say.”

“Don’t go to the theatre to-night, Dorian,” said Hallward. “Stop and dine with me.”

“I can’t, Basil.”

“Why?”

“Because I have promised Lord Henry Wotton to go with him.”

“He won’t like you the better for keeping your promises. He always breaks his own. I beg you not to go.”

Dorian Gray laughed and shook his head.

“I entreat you.”

The lad hesitated, and looked over at Lord Henry, who was watching them from the tea-table with an amused smile.

“I must go, Basil,” he answered.

“Very well,” said Hallward, and he went over and laid down his cup on the tray. “It is rather late, and, as you have to dress, you had better lose no time. Good-bye, Harry. Good-bye, Dorian. Come and see me soon. Come to-morrow.”

“Certainly.”

“You won’t forget?”

“No, of course not,” cried Dorian.

“And ... Harry!”

“Yes, Basil?”

“Remember what I asked you, when we were in the garden this morning.”

“I have forgotten it.”

“I trust you.”

“I wish I could trust myself,” said Lord Henry, laughing. “Come, Mr. Gray, my hansom is outside, and I can drop you at your own place. Good-bye, Basil. It has been a most interesting afternoon.”

As the door closed behind them, the painter flung himself down on a sofa, and a look of pain came into his face.
At half-past twelve next day Lord Henry Wotton strolled from Curzon Street over to the Albany to call on his uncle, Lord Fermor, a genial if somewhat rough-mannered old bachelor, whom the outside world called selfish because it derived no particular benefit from him, but who was considered generous by Society as he fed the people who amused him. His father had been our ambassador at Madrid when Isabella was young and Prim unthought of, but had retired from the diplomatic service in a capricious moment of annoyance on not being offered the Embassy at Paris, a post to which he considered that he was fully entitled by reason of his birth, his indolence, the good English of his dispatches, and his inordinate passion for pleasure. The son, who had been his father’s secretary, had resigned along with his chief, somewhat foolishly as was thought at the time, and on succeeding some months later to the title, had set himself to the serious study of the great aristocratic art of doing absolutely nothing. He had two large town houses, but preferred to live in chambers as it was less trouble, and took most of his meals at his club. He paid some attention to the management of his collieries in the Midland counties, excusing himself for this taint of industry on the ground that the one advantage of having coal was that it enabled a gentleman to afford the decency of burning wood on his own hearth. In politics he was a Tory, except when the Tories were in office, during which period he roundly abused them for being a pack of Radicals. He was a hero to his valet, who bullied him, and a terror to most of his relations, whom he bullied in turn. Only England could have produced him, and he always said that the country was going to the dogs. His principles were out of date, but there was a good deal to be said for his prejudices.

When Lord Henry entered the room, he found his uncle sitting in a rough shooting-coat, smoking a cheroot and grumbling over The Times. “Well, Harry,” said the old gentleman, “what brings you out so early? I thought you dandies never got up till two, and were not visible till five.”

“Pure family affection, I assure you, Uncle George. I want to get something out of you.”

“Money, I suppose,” said Lord Fermor, making a wry face. “Well, sit down and tell me all about it. Young people, nowadays, imagine that money is everything.”

“Yes,” murmured Lord Henry, settling his button-hole in his coat; “and when they grow older they know it. But I don’t want money. It is only people who pay their bills who want that, Uncle George, and I never pay mine. Credit is the capital of a younger son, and one lives charmingly upon it. Besides, I always deal with Dartmoor’s tradesmen, and consequently they never bother me. What I want is information: not useful information, of course; useless information.”

“Well, I can tell you anything that is in an English Blue Book, Harry, although those fellows nowadays write a lot of nonsense. When I was in the Diplomatic, things were much better. But I hear they let them in now by examination. What can you expect? Examinations, sir, are pure humbug from beginning to end. If a man is a gentleman, he knows quite enough, and if he is not a gentleman, whatever he knows is bad for him.”

“Mr. Dorian Gray does not belong to Blue Books, Uncle George,” said Lord Henry languidly.

“Mr. Dorian Gray? Who is he?” asked Lord Fermor, knitting his bushy white eyebrows.

“That is what I have come to learn, Uncle George. Or rather, I know who he is. He is the last Lord Kelso’s grandson. His mother was a Devereux, Lady Margaret Devereux. I want you to tell me about his mother. What was she like? Whom did she marry? You have known nearly everybody in your time, so you might have known her. I am very much interested in Mr. Gray at present. I have only just met him.”

“Kelso’s grandson!” echoed the old gentleman. “Kelso’s grandson! ... Of course.... I knew his mother intimately. I believe I was at her christening. She was an extraordinarily beautiful girl, Margaret Devereux, and made all the men frantic by running away with a penniless young fellow—a mere nobody, sir, a subaltern in a foot regiment, or something of that kind. Certainly. I remember the whole thing as if it happened yesterday. The poor chap was killed in a duel at Spa a few months after the marriage. There was an ugly story about it. They said Kelso got some rascally adventurer, some Belgian brute, to insult his son-in-law in public—paid him, sir, to do it, paid him—and that the fellow spitted his man as if he had been a pigeon. The thing was hushed up, but, egad, Kelso ate his chop alone at the club for some time afterwards. He brought his daughter back with him, I was told, and she never spoke to him again. Oh, yes; it was a bad business. The girl died, too, died within a year. So she left a son, did she? I had forgotten that. What sort of boy is he? If he is like his mother, he must be a good-looking chap.”

“He is very good-looking,” assented Lord Henry.

“I hope he will fall into proper hands,” continued the old man. “He should have a pot of money waiting for him if Kelso did the right thing by him. His mother had money, too. All the Selby property came to her, through her grandfather. Her grandfather hated Kelso, thought him a mean dog. He was, too. Came to Madrid once when I was there. Egad, I was ashamed of him. The Queen used to ask me about the English noble who was always quarrelling with the cabmen about their fares. They made quite a story of it. I didn’t dare show my face at Court for a month. I hope he treated his grandson better than he did the jarvies.”

“I don’t know,” answered Lord Henry. “I fancy that the boy will be well off. He is not of age yet. He has Selby, I know. He told me so. And ... his mother was very beautiful?”

“Margaret Devereux was one of the loveliest creatures I ever saw, Harry. What on earth induced her to behave as she did, I never could understand. She could have married anybody she chose. Carlington was mad after her. She was romantic, though. All the women of that family were. The men were a poor lot, but, egad! the women were wonderful. Carlington went on his knees to her. Told me so himself. She laughed at him, and there wasn’t a girl in London at the time who wasn’t after him. And by the way, Harry, talking about silly marriages, what is this humbug your father tells me about Dartmoor wanting to marry an American? Ain’t English girls good enough for him?”

“It is rather fashionable to marry Americans just now, Uncle George.”

“I’ll back English women against the world, Harry,” said Lord Fermor, striking the table with his fist.

“The betting is on the Americans.”

“They don’t last, I am told,” muttered his uncle.

“A long engagement exhausts them, but they are capital at a steeplechase. They take things flying. I don’t think Dartmoor has a chance.”

“Who are her people?” grumbled the old gentleman. “Has she got any?”

Lord Henry shook his head. “American girls are as clever at concealing their parents, as English women are at concealing their past,” he said, rising to go.

“They are pork-packers, I suppose?”

“I hope so, Uncle George, for Dartmoor’s sake. I am told that pork-packing is the most lucrative profession in America, after politics.”

“Is she pretty?”

“She behaves as if she was beautiful. Most American women do. It is the secret of their charm.”

“Why can’t these American women stay in their own country? They are always telling us that it is the paradise for women.”

“It is. That is the reason why, like Eve, they are so excessively anxious to get out of it,” said Lord Henry. “Good-bye, Uncle George. I shall be late for lunch, if I stop any longer. Thanks for giving me the information I wanted. I always like to know everything about my new friends, and nothing about my old ones.”

“Where are you lunching, Harry?”

“At Aunt Agatha’s. I have asked myself and Mr. Gray. He is her latest protégé.”

“Humph! tell your Aunt Agatha, Harry, not to bother me any more with her charity appeals. I am sick of them. Why, the good woman thinks that I have nothing to do but to write cheques for her silly fads.”

“All right, Uncle George, I’ll tell her, but it won’t have any effect. Philanthropic people lose all sense of humanity. It is their distinguishing characteristic.”

The old gentleman growled approvingly and rang the bell for his servant. Lord Henry passed up the low arcade into Burlington Street and turned his steps in the direction of Berkeley Square.

So that was the story of Dorian Gray’s parentage. Crudely as it had been told to him, it had yet stirred him by its suggestion of a strange, almost modern romance. A beautiful woman risking everything for a mad passion. A few wild weeks of happiness cut short by a hideous, treacherous crime. Months of voiceless agony, and then a child born in pain. The mother snatched away by death, the boy left to solitude and the tyranny of an old and loveless man. Yes; it was an interesting background. It posed the lad, made him more perfect, as it were. Behind every exquisite thing that existed, there was something tragic. Worlds had to be in travail, that the meanest flower might blow.... And how charming he had been at dinner the night before, as with startled eyes and lips parted in frightened pleasure he had sat opposite to him at the club, the red candleshades staining to a richer rose the wakening wonder of his face. Talking to him was like playing upon an exquisite violin. He answered to every touch and thrill of the bow.... There was something terribly enthralling in the exercise of influence. No other activity was like it. To project one’s soul into some gracious form, and let it tarry there for a moment; to hear one’s own intellectual views echoed back to one with all the added music of passion and youth; to convey one’s temperament into another as though it were a subtle fluid or a strange perfume: there was a real joy in that—perhaps the most satisfying joy left to us in an age so limited and vulgar as our own, an age grossly carnal in its pleasures, and grossly common in its aims.... He was a marvellous type, too, this lad, whom by so curious a chance he had met in Basil’s studio, or could be fashioned into a marvellous type, at any rate. Grace was his, and the white purity of boyhood, and beauty such as old Greek marbles kept for us. There was nothing that one could not do with him. He could be made a Titan or a toy. What a pity it was that such beauty was destined to fade! ... And Basil? From a psychological point of view, how interesting he was! The new manner in art, the fresh mode of looking at life, suggested so strangely by the merely visible presence of one who was unconscious of it all; the silent spirit that dwelt in dim woodland, and walked unseen in open field, suddenly showing herself, Dryadlike and not afraid, because in his soul who sought for her there had been wakened that wonderful vision to which alone are wonderful things revealed; the mere shapes and patterns of things becoming, as it were, refined, and gaining a kind of symbolical value, as though they were themselves patterns of some other and more perfect form whose shadow they made real: how strange it all was! He remembered something like it in history. Was it not Plato, that artist in thought, who had first analyzed it? Was it not Buonarotti who had carved it in the coloured marbles of a sonnet-sequence? But in our own century it was strange.... Yes; he would try to be to Dorian Gray what, without knowing it, the lad was to the painter who had fashioned the wonderful portrait. He would seek to dominate him—had already, indeed, half done so. He would make that wonderful spirit his own. There was something fascinating in this son of love and death.

Suddenly he stopped and glanced up at the houses. He found that he had passed his aunt’s some distance, and, smiling to himself, turned back. When he entered the somewhat sombre hall, the butler told him that they had gone in to lunch. He gave one of the footmen his hat and stick and passed into the dining-room.

“Late as usual, Harry,” cried his aunt, shaking her head at him.

He invented a facile excuse, and having taken the vacant seat next to her, looked round to see who was there. Dorian bowed to him shyly from the end of the table, a flush of pleasure stealing into his cheek. Opposite was the Duchess of Harley, a lady of admirable good-nature and good temper, much liked by every one who knew her, and of those ample architectural proportions that in women who are not duchesses are described by contemporary historians as stoutness. Next to her sat, on her right, Sir Thomas Burdon, a Radical member of Parliament, who followed his leader in public life and in private life followed the best cooks, dining with the Tories and thinking with the Liberals, in accordance with a wise and well-known rule. The post on her left was occupied by Mr. Erskine of Treadley, an old gentleman of considerable charm and culture, who had fallen, however, into bad habits of silence, having, as he explained once to Lady Agatha, said everything that he had to say before he was thirty. His own neighbour was Mrs. Vandeleur, one of his aunt’s oldest friends, a perfect saint amongst women, but so dreadfully dowdy that she reminded one of a badly bound hymn-book. Fortunately for him she had on the other side Lord Faudel, a most intelligent middle-aged mediocrity, as bald as a ministerial statement in the House of Commons, with whom she was conversing in that intensely earnest manner which is the one unpardonable error, as he remarked once himself, that all really good people fall into, and from which none of them ever quite escape.

“We are talking about poor Dartmoor, Lord Henry,” cried the duchess, nodding pleasantly to him across the table. “Do you think he will really marry this fascinating young person?”

“I believe she has made up her mind to propose to him, Duchess.”

“How dreadful!” exclaimed Lady Agatha. “Really, some one should interfere.”

“I am told, on excellent authority, that her father keeps an American dry-goods store,” said Sir Thomas Burdon, looking supercilious.

“My uncle has already suggested pork-packing, Sir Thomas.”

“Dry-goods! What are American dry-goods?” asked the duchess, raising her large hands in wonder and accentuating the verb.

“American novels,” answered Lord Henry, helping himself to some quail.

The duchess looked puzzled.

“Don’t mind him, my dear,” whispered Lady Agatha. “He never means anything that he says.”

“When America was discovered,” said the Radical member—and he began to give some wearisome facts. Like all people who try to exhaust a subject, he exhausted his listeners. The duchess sighed and exercised her privilege of interruption. “I wish to goodness it never had been discovered at all!” she exclaimed. “Really, our girls have no chance nowadays. It is most unfair.”

“Perhaps, after all, America never has been discovered,” said Mr. Erskine; “I myself would say that it had merely been detected.”

“Oh! but I have seen specimens of the inhabitants,” answered the duchess vaguely. “I must confess that most of them are extremely pretty. And they dress well, too. They get all their dresses in Paris. I wish I could afford to do the same.”

“They say that when good Americans die they go to Paris,” chuckled Sir Thomas, who had a large wardrobe of Humour’s cast-off clothes.

“Really! And where do bad Americans go to when they die?” inquired the duchess.

“They go to America,” murmured Lord Henry.

Sir Thomas frowned. “I am afraid that your nephew is prejudiced against that great country,” he said to Lady Agatha. “I have travelled all over it in cars provided by the directors, who, in such matters, are extremely civil. I assure you that it is an education to visit it.”

“But must we really see Chicago in order to be educated?” asked Mr. Erskine plaintively. “I don’t feel up to the journey.”

Sir Thomas waved his hand. “Mr. Erskine of Treadley has the world on his shelves. We practical men like to see things, not to read about them. The Americans are an extremely interesting people. They are absolutely reasonable. I think that is their distinguishing characteristic. Yes, Mr. Erskine, an absolutely reasonable people. I assure you there is no nonsense about the Americans.”

“How dreadful!” cried Lord Henry. “I can stand brute force, but brute reason is quite unbearable. There is something unfair about its use. It is hitting below the intellect.”

“I do not understand you,” said Sir Thomas, growing rather red.

“I do, Lord Henry,” murmured Mr. Erskine, with a smile.

“Paradoxes are all very well in their way....” rejoined the baronet.

“Was that a paradox?” asked Mr. Erskine. “I did not think so. Perhaps it was. Well, the way of paradoxes is the way of truth. To test reality we must see it on the tight rope. When the verities become acrobats, we can judge them.”

“Dear me!” said Lady Agatha, “how you men argue! I am sure I never can make out what you are talking about. Oh! Harry, I am quite vexed with you. Why do you try to persuade our nice Mr. Dorian Gray to give up the East End? I assure you he would be quite invaluable. They would love his playing.”

“I want him to play to me,” cried Lord Henry, smiling, and he looked down the table and caught a bright answering glance.

“But they are so unhappy in Whitechapel,” continued Lady Agatha.

“I can sympathize with everything except suffering,” said Lord Henry, shrugging his shoulders. “I cannot sympathize with that. It is too ugly, too horrible, too distressing. There is something terribly morbid in the modern sympathy with pain. One should sympathize with the colour, the beauty, the joy of life. The less said about life’s sores, the better.”

“Still, the East End is a very important problem,” remarked Sir Thomas with a grave shake of the head.

“Quite so,” answered the young lord. “It is the problem of slavery, and we try to solve it by amusing the slaves.”

The politician looked at him keenly. “What change do you propose, then?” he asked.

Lord Henry laughed. “I don’t desire to change anything in England except the weather,” he answered. “I am quite content with philosophic contemplation. But, as the nineteenth century has gone bankrupt through an over-expenditure of sympathy, I would suggest that we should appeal to science to put us straight. The advantage of the emotions is that they lead us astray, and the advantage of science is that it is not emotional.”

“But we have such grave responsibilities,” ventured Mrs. Vandeleur timidly.

“Terribly grave,” echoed Lady Agatha.

Lord Henry looked over at Mr. Erskine. “Humanity takes itself too seriously. It is the world’s original sin. If the caveman had known how to laugh, history would have been different.”

“You are really very comforting,” warbled the duchess. “I have always felt rather guilty when I came to see your dear aunt, for I take no interest at all in the East End. For the future I shall be able to look her in the face without a blush.”

“A blush is very becoming, Duchess,” remarked Lord Henry.

“Only when one is young,” she answered. “When an old woman like myself blushes, it is a very bad sign. Ah! Lord Henry, I wish you would tell me how to become young again.”

He thought for a moment. “Can you remember any great error that you committed in your early days, Duchess?” he asked, looking at her across the table.

“A great many, I fear,” she cried.

“Then commit them over again,” he said gravely. “To get back one’s youth, one has merely to repeat one’s follies.”

“A delightful theory!” she exclaimed. “I must put it into practice.”

“A dangerous theory!” came from Sir Thomas’s tight lips. Lady Agatha shook her head, but could not help being amused. Mr. Erskine listened.

“Yes,” he continued, “that is one of the great secrets of life. Nowadays most people die of a sort of creeping common sense, and discover when it is too late that the only things one never regrets are one’s mistakes.”

A laugh ran round the table.

He played with the idea and grew wilful; tossed it into the air and transformed it; let it escape and recaptured it; made it iridescent with fancy and winged it with paradox. The praise of folly, as he went on, soared into a philosophy, and philosophy herself became young, and catching the mad music of pleasure, wearing, one might fancy, her wine-stained robe and wreath of ivy, danced like a Bacchante over the hills of life, and mocked the slow Silenus for being sober. Facts fled before her like frightened forest things. Her white feet trod the huge press at which wise Omar sits, till the seething grape-juice rose round her bare limbs in waves of purple bubbles, or crawled in red foam over the vat’s black, dripping, sloping sides. It was an extraordinary improvisation. He felt that the eyes of Dorian Gray were fixed on him, and the consciousness that amongst his audience there was one whose temperament he wished to fascinate seemed to give his wit keenness and to lend colour to his imagination. He was brilliant, fantastic, irresponsible. He charmed his listeners out of themselves, and they followed his pipe, laughing. Dorian Gray never took his gaze off him, but sat like one under a spell, smiles chasing each other over his lips and wonder growing grave in his darkening eyes.

At last, liveried in the costume of the age, reality entered the room in the shape of a servant to tell the duchess that her carriage was waiting. She wrung her hands in mock despair. “How annoying!” she cried. “I must go. I have to call for my husband at the club, to take him to some absurd meeting at Willis’s Rooms, where he is going to be in the chair. If I am late he is sure to be furious, and I couldn’t have a scene in this bonnet. It is far too fragile. A harsh word would ruin it. No, I must go, dear Agatha. Good-bye, Lord Henry, you are quite delightful and dreadfully demoralizing. I am sure I don’t know what to say about your views. You must come and dine with us some night. Tuesday? Are you disengaged Tuesday?”

“For you I would throw over anybody, Duchess,” said Lord Henry with a bow.

“Ah! that is very nice, and very wrong of you,” she cried; “so mind you come”; and she swept out of the room, followed by Lady Agatha and the other ladies.

When Lord Henry had sat down again, Mr. Erskine moved round, and taking a chair close to him, placed his hand upon his arm.

“You talk books away,” he said; “why don’t you write one?”

“I am too fond of reading books to care to write them, Mr. Erskine. I should like to write a novel certainly, a novel that would be as lovely as a Persian carpet and as unreal. But there is no literary public in England for anything except newspapers, primers, and encyclopaedias. Of all people in the world the English have the least sense of the beauty of literature.”

“I fear you are right,” answered Mr. Erskine. “I myself used to have literary ambitions, but I gave them up long ago. And now, my dear young friend, if you will allow me to call you so, may I ask if you really meant all that you said to us at lunch?”

“I quite forget what I said,” smiled Lord Henry. “Was it all very bad?”

“Very bad indeed. In fact I consider you extremely dangerous, and if anything happens to our good duchess, we shall all look on you as being primarily responsible. But I should like to talk to you about life. The generation into which I was born was tedious. Some day, when you are tired of London, come down to Treadley and expound to me your philosophy of pleasure over some admirable Burgundy I am fortunate enough to possess.”

“I shall be charmed. A visit to Treadley would be a great privilege. It has a perfect host, and a perfect library.”

“You will complete it,” answered the old gentleman with a courteous bow. “And now I must bid good-bye to your excellent aunt. I am due at the Athenaeum. It is the hour when we sleep there.”

“All of you, Mr. Erskine?”

“Forty of us, in forty arm-chairs. We are practising for an English Academy of Letters.”

Lord Henry laughed and rose. “I am going to the park,” he cried.

As he was passing out of the door, Dorian Gray touched him on the arm. “Let me come with you,” he murmured.

“But I thought you had promised Basil Hallward to go and see him,” answered Lord Henry.

“I would sooner come with you; yes, I feel I must come with you. Do let me. And you will promise to talk to me all the time? No one talks so wonderfully as you do.”

“Ah! I have talked quite enough for to-day,” said Lord Henry, smiling. “All I want now is to look at life. You may come and look at it with me, if you care to.”
One afternoon, a month later, Dorian Gray was reclining in a luxurious arm-chair, in the little library of Lord Henry’s house in Mayfair. It was, in its way, a very charming room, with its high panelled wainscoting of olive-stained oak, its cream-coloured frieze and ceiling of raised plasterwork, and its brickdust felt carpet strewn with silk, long-fringed Persian rugs. On a tiny satinwood table stood a statuette by Clodion, and beside it lay a copy of Les Cent Nouvelles, bound for Margaret of Valois by Clovis Eve and powdered with the gilt daisies that Queen had selected for her device. Some large blue china jars and parrot-tulips were ranged on the mantelshelf, and through the small leaded panes of the window streamed the apricot-coloured light of a summer day in London.

Lord Henry had not yet come in. He was always late on principle, his principle being that punctuality is the thief of time. So the lad was looking rather sulky, as with listless fingers he turned over the pages of an elaborately illustrated edition of Manon Lescaut that he had found in one of the book-cases. The formal monotonous ticking of the Louis Quatorze clock annoyed him. Once or twice he thought of going away.

At last he heard a step outside, and the door opened. “How late you are, Harry!” he murmured.

“I am afraid it is not Harry, Mr. Gray,” answered a shrill voice.

He glanced quickly round and rose to his feet. “I beg your pardon. I thought—”

“You thought it was my husband. It is only his wife. You must let me introduce myself. I know you quite well by your photographs. I think my husband has got seventeen of them.”

“Not seventeen, Lady Henry?”

“Well, eighteen, then. And I saw you with him the other night at the opera.” She laughed nervously as she spoke, and watched him with her vague forget-me-not eyes. She was a curious woman, whose dresses always looked as if they had been designed in a rage and put on in a tempest. She was usually in love with somebody, and, as her passion was never returned, she had kept all her illusions. She tried to look picturesque, but only succeeded in being untidy. Her name was Victoria, and she had a perfect mania for going to church.

“That was at Lohengrin, Lady Henry, I think?”

“Yes; it was at dear Lohengrin. I like Wagner’s music better than anybody’s. It is so loud that one can talk the whole time without other people hearing what one says. That is a great advantage, don’t you think so, Mr. Gray?”

The same nervous staccato laugh broke from her thin lips, and her fingers began to play with a long tortoise-shell paper-knife.

Dorian smiled and shook his head: “I am afraid I don’t think so, Lady Henry. I never talk during music—at least, during good music. If one hears bad music, it is one’s duty to drown it in conversation.”

“Ah! that is one of Harry’s views, isn’t it, Mr. Gray? I always hear Harry’s views from his friends. It is the only way I get to know of them. But you must not think I don’t like good music. I adore it, but I am afraid of it. It makes me too romantic. I have simply worshipped pianists—two at a time, sometimes, Harry tells me. I don’t know what it is about them. Perhaps it is that they are foreigners. They all are, ain’t they? Even those that are born in England become foreigners after a time, don’t they? It is so clever of them, and such a compliment to art. Makes it quite cosmopolitan, doesn’t it? You have never been to any of my parties, have you, Mr. Gray? You must come. I can’t afford orchids, but I spare no expense in foreigners. They make one’s rooms look so picturesque. But here is Harry! Harry, I came in to look for you, to ask you something—I forget what it was—and I found Mr. Gray here. We have had such a pleasant chat about music. We have quite the same ideas. No; I think our ideas are quite different. But he has been most pleasant. I am so glad I’ve seen him.”

“I am charmed, my love, quite charmed,” said Lord Henry, elevating his dark, crescent-shaped eyebrows and looking at them both with an amused smile. “So sorry I am late, Dorian. I went to look after a piece of old brocade in Wardour Street and had to bargain for hours for it. Nowadays people know the price of everything and the value of nothing.”

“I am afraid I must be going,” exclaimed Lady Henry, breaking an awkward silence with her silly sudden laugh. “I have promised to drive with the duchess. Good-bye, Mr. Gray. Good-bye, Harry. You are dining out, I suppose? So am I. Perhaps I shall see you at Lady Thornbury’s.”

“I dare say, my dear,” said Lord Henry, shutting the door behind her as, looking like a bird of paradise that had been out all night in the rain, she flitted out of the room, leaving a faint odour of frangipanni. Then he lit a cigarette and flung himself down on the sofa.

“Never marry a woman with straw-coloured hair, Dorian,” he said after a few puffs.

“Why, Harry?”

“Because they are so sentimental.”

“But I like sentimental people.”

“Never marry at all, Dorian. Men marry because they are tired; women, because they are curious: both are disappointed.”

“I don’t think I am likely to marry, Harry. I am too much in love. That is one of your aphorisms. I am putting it into practice, as I do everything that you say.”

“Who are you in love with?” asked Lord Henry after a pause.

“With an actress,” said Dorian Gray, blushing.

Lord Henry shrugged his shoulders. “That is a rather commonplace début.”

“You would not say so if you saw her, Harry.”

“Who is she?”

“Her name is Sibyl Vane.”

“Never heard of her.”

“No one has. People will some day, however. She is a genius.”

“My dear boy, no woman is a genius. Women are a decorative sex. They never have anything to say, but they say it charmingly. Women represent the triumph of matter over mind, just as men represent the triumph of mind over morals.”

“Harry, how can you?”

“My dear Dorian, it is quite true. I am analysing women at present, so I ought to know. The subject is not so abstruse as I thought it was. I find that, ultimately, there are only two kinds of women, the plain and the coloured. The plain women are very useful. If you want to gain a reputation for respectability, you have merely to take them down to supper. The other women are very charming. They commit one mistake, however. They paint in order to try and look young. Our grandmothers painted in order to try and talk brilliantly. Rouge and esprit used to go together. That is all over now. As long as a woman can look ten years younger than her own daughter, she is perfectly satisfied. As for conversation, there are only five women in London worth talking to, and two of these can’t be admitted into decent society. However, tell me about your genius. How long have you known her?”

“Ah! Harry, your views terrify me.”

“Never mind that. How long have you known her?”

“About three weeks.”

“And where did you come across her?”

“I will tell you, Harry, but you mustn’t be unsympathetic about it. After all, it never would have happened if I had not met you. You filled me with a wild desire to know everything about life. For days after I met you, something seemed to throb in my veins. As I lounged in the park, or strolled down Piccadilly, I used to look at every one who passed me and wonder, with a mad curiosity, what sort of lives they led. Some of them fascinated me. Others filled me with terror. There was an exquisite poison in the air. I had a passion for sensations.... Well, one evening about seven o’clock, I determined to go out in search of some adventure. I felt that this grey monstrous London of ours, with its myriads of people, its sordid sinners, and its splendid sins, as you once phrased it, must have something in store for me. I fancied a thousand things. The mere danger gave me a sense of delight. I remembered what you had said to me on that wonderful evening when we first dined together, about the search for beauty being the real secret of life. I don’t know what I expected, but I went out and wandered eastward, soon losing my way in a labyrinth of grimy streets and black grassless squares. About half-past eight I passed by an absurd little theatre, with great flaring gas-jets and gaudy play-bills. A hideous Jew, in the most amazing waistcoat I ever beheld in my life, was standing at the entrance, smoking a vile cigar. He had greasy ringlets, and an enormous diamond blazed in the centre of a soiled shirt. ‘Have a box, my Lord?’ he said, when he saw me, and he took off his hat with an air of gorgeous servility. There was something about him, Harry, that amused me. He was such a monster. You will laugh at me, I know, but I really went in and paid a whole guinea for the stage-box. To the present day I can’t make out why I did so; and yet if I hadn’t—my dear Harry, if I hadn’t—I should have missed the greatest romance of my life. I see you are laughing. It is horrid of you!”

“I am not laughing, Dorian; at least I am not laughing at you. But you should not say the greatest romance of your life. You should say the first romance of your life. You will always be loved, and you will always be in love with love. A grande passion is the privilege of people who have nothing to do. That is the one use of the idle classes of a country. Don’t be afraid. There are exquisite things in store for you. This is merely the beginning.”

“Do you think my nature so shallow?” cried Dorian Gray angrily.

“No; I think your nature so deep.”

“How do you mean?”

“My dear boy, the people who love only once in their lives are really the shallow people. What they call their loyalty, and their fidelity, I call either the lethargy of custom or their lack of imagination. Faithfulness is to the emotional life what consistency is to the life of the intellect—simply a confession of failure. Faithfulness! I must analyse it some day. The passion for property is in it. There are many things that we would throw away if we were not afraid that others might pick them up. But I don’t want to interrupt you. Go on with your story.”

“Well, I found myself seated in a horrid little private box, with a vulgar drop-scene staring me in the face. I looked out from behind the curtain and surveyed the house. It was a tawdry affair, all Cupids and cornucopias, like a third-rate wedding-cake. The gallery and pit were fairly full, but the two rows of dingy stalls were quite empty, and there was hardly a person in what I suppose they called the dress-circle. Women went about with oranges and ginger-beer, and there was a terrible consumption of nuts going on.”

“It must have been just like the palmy days of the British drama.”

“Just like, I should fancy, and very depressing. I began to wonder what on earth I should do when I caught sight of the play-bill. What do you think the play was, Harry?”

“I should think ‘The Idiot Boy’, or ‘Dumb but Innocent’. Our fathers used to like that sort of piece, I believe. The longer I live, Dorian, the more keenly I feel that whatever was good enough for our fathers is not good enough for us. In art, as in politics, les grandpères ont toujours tort.”

“This play was good enough for us, Harry. It was Romeo and Juliet. I must admit that I was rather annoyed at the idea of seeing Shakespeare done in such a wretched hole of a place. Still, I felt interested, in a sort of way. At any rate, I determined to wait for the first act. There was a dreadful orchestra, presided over by a young Hebrew who sat at a cracked piano, that nearly drove me away, but at last the drop-scene was drawn up and the play began. Romeo was a stout elderly gentleman, with corked eyebrows, a husky tragedy voice, and a figure like a beer-barrel. Mercutio was almost as bad. He was played by the low-comedian, who had introduced gags of his own and was on most friendly terms with the pit. They were both as grotesque as the scenery, and that looked as if it had come out of a country-booth. But Juliet! Harry, imagine a girl, hardly seventeen years of age, with a little, flowerlike face, a small Greek head with plaited coils of dark-brown hair, eyes that were violet wells of passion, lips that were like the petals of a rose. She was the loveliest thing I had ever seen in my life. You said to me once that pathos left you unmoved, but that beauty, mere beauty, could fill your eyes with tears. I tell you, Harry, I could hardly see this girl for the mist of tears that came across me. And her voice—I never heard such a voice. It was very low at first, with deep mellow notes that seemed to fall singly upon one’s ear. Then it became a little louder, and sounded like a flute or a distant hautboy. In the garden-scene it had all the tremulous ecstasy that one hears just before dawn when nightingales are singing. There were moments, later on, when it had the wild passion of violins. You know how a voice can stir one. Your voice and the voice of Sibyl Vane are two things that I shall never forget. When I close my eyes, I hear them, and each of them says something different. I don’t know which to follow. Why should I not love her? Harry, I do love her. She is everything to me in life. Night after night I go to see her play. One evening she is Rosalind, and the next evening she is Imogen. I have seen her die in the gloom of an Italian tomb, sucking the poison from her lover’s lips. I have watched her wandering through the forest of Arden, disguised as a pretty boy in hose and doublet and dainty cap. She has been mad, and has come into the presence of a guilty king, and given him rue to wear and bitter herbs to taste of. She has been innocent, and the black hands of jealousy have crushed her reedlike throat. I have seen her in every age and in every costume. Ordinary women never appeal to one’s imagination. They are limited to their century. No glamour ever transfigures them. One knows their minds as easily as one knows their bonnets. One can always find them. There is no mystery in any of them. They ride in the park in the morning and chatter at tea-parties in the afternoon. They have their stereotyped smile and their fashionable manner. They are quite obvious. But an actress! How different an actress is! Harry! why didn’t you tell me that the only thing worth loving is an actress?”

“Because I have loved so many of them, Dorian.”

“Oh, yes, horrid people with dyed hair and painted faces.”

“Don’t run down dyed hair and painted faces. There is an extraordinary charm in them, sometimes,” said Lord Henry.

“I wish now I had not told you about Sibyl Vane.”

“You could not have helped telling me, Dorian. All through your life you will tell me everything you do.”

“Yes, Harry, I believe that is true. I cannot help telling you things. You have a curious influence over me. If I ever did a crime, I would come and confess it to you. You would understand me.”

“People like you—the wilful sunbeams of life—don’t commit crimes, Dorian. But I am much obliged for the compliment, all the same. And now tell me—reach me the matches, like a good boy—thanks—what are your actual relations with Sibyl Vane?”

Dorian Gray leaped to his feet, with flushed cheeks and burning eyes. “Harry! Sibyl Vane is sacred!”

“It is only the sacred things that are worth touching, Dorian,” said Lord Henry, with a strange touch of pathos in his voice. “But why should you be annoyed? I suppose she will belong to you some day. When one is in love, one always begins by deceiving one’s self, and one always ends by deceiving others. That is what the world calls a romance. You know her, at any rate, I suppose?”

“Of course I know her. On the first night I was at the theatre, the horrid old Jew came round to the box after the performance was over and offered to take me behind the scenes and introduce me to her. I was furious with him, and told him that Juliet had been dead for hundreds of years and that her body was lying in a marble tomb in Verona. I think, from his blank look of amazement, that he was under the impression that I had taken too much champagne, or something.”

“I am not surprised.”

“Then he asked me if I wrote for any of the newspapers. I told him I never even read them. He seemed terribly disappointed at that, and confided to me that all the dramatic critics were in a conspiracy against him, and that they were every one of them to be bought.”

“I should not wonder if he was quite right there. But, on the other hand, judging from their appearance, most of them cannot be at all expensive.”

“Well, he seemed to think they were beyond his means,” laughed Dorian. “By this time, however, the lights were being put out in the theatre, and I had to go. He wanted me to try some cigars that he strongly recommended. I declined. The next night, of course, I arrived at the place again. When he saw me, he made me a low bow and assured me that I was a munificent patron of art. He was a most offensive brute, though he had an extraordinary passion for Shakespeare. He told me once, with an air of pride, that his five bankruptcies were entirely due to ‘The Bard,’ as he insisted on calling him. He seemed to think it a distinction.”

“It was a distinction, my dear Dorian—a great distinction. Most people become bankrupt through having invested too heavily in the prose of life. To have ruined one’s self over poetry is an honour. But when did you first speak to Miss Sibyl Vane?”

“The third night. She had been playing Rosalind. I could not help going round. I had thrown her some flowers, and she had looked at me—at least I fancied that she had. The old Jew was persistent. He seemed determined to take me behind, so I consented. It was curious my not wanting to know her, wasn’t it?”

“No; I don’t think so.”

“My dear Harry, why?”

“I will tell you some other time. Now I want to know about the girl.”

“Sibyl? Oh, she was so shy and so gentle. There is something of a child about her. Her eyes opened wide in exquisite wonder when I told her what I thought of her performance, and she seemed quite unconscious of her power. I think we were both rather nervous. The old Jew stood grinning at the doorway of the dusty greenroom, making elaborate speeches about us both, while we stood looking at each other like children. He would insist on calling me ‘My Lord,’ so I had to assure Sibyl that I was not anything of the kind. She said quite simply to me, ‘You look more like a prince. I must call you Prince Charming.’”

“Upon my word, Dorian, Miss Sibyl knows how to pay compliments.”

“You don’t understand her, Harry. She regarded me merely as a person in a play. She knows nothing of life. She lives with her mother, a faded tired woman who played Lady Capulet in a sort of magenta dressing-wrapper on the first night, and looks as if she had seen better days.”

“I know that look. It depresses me,” murmured Lord Henry, examining his rings.

“The Jew wanted to tell me her history, but I said it did not interest me.”

“You were quite right. There is always something infinitely mean about other people’s tragedies.”

“Sibyl is the only thing I care about. What is it to me where she came from? From her little head to her little feet, she is absolutely and entirely divine. Every night of my life I go to see her act, and every night she is more marvellous.”

“That is the reason, I suppose, that you never dine with me now. I thought you must have some curious romance on hand. You have; but it is not quite what I expected.”

“My dear Harry, we either lunch or sup together every day, and I have been to the opera with you several times,” said Dorian, opening his blue eyes in wonder.

“You always come dreadfully late.”

“Well, I can’t help going to see Sibyl play,” he cried, “even if it is only for a single act. I get hungry for her presence; and when I think of the wonderful soul that is hidden away in that little ivory body, I am filled with awe.”

“You can dine with me to-night, Dorian, can’t you?”

He shook his head. “To-night she is Imogen,” he answered, “and to-morrow night she will be Juliet.”

“When is she Sibyl Vane?”

“Never.”

“I congratulate you.”

“How horrid you are! She is all the great heroines of the world in one. She is more than an individual. You laugh, but I tell you she has genius. I love her, and I must make her love me. You, who know all the secrets of life, tell me how to charm Sibyl Vane to love me! I want to make Romeo jealous. I want the dead lovers of the world to hear our laughter and grow sad. I want a breath of our passion to stir their dust into consciousness, to wake their ashes into pain. My God, Harry, how I worship her!” He was walking up and down the room as he spoke. Hectic spots of red burned on his cheeks. He was terribly excited.

Lord Henry watched him with a subtle sense of pleasure. How different he was now from the shy frightened boy he had met in Basil Hallward’s studio! His nature had developed like a flower, had borne blossoms of scarlet flame. Out of its secret hiding-place had crept his soul, and desire had come to meet it on the way.

“And what do you propose to do?” said Lord Henry at last.

“I want you and Basil to come with me some night and see her act. I have not the slightest fear of the result. You are certain to acknowledge her genius. Then we must get her out of the Jew’s hands. She is bound to him for three years—at least for two years and eight months—from the present time. I shall have to pay him something, of course. When all that is settled, I shall take a West End theatre and bring her out properly. She will make the world as mad as she has made me.”

“That would be impossible, my dear boy.”

“Yes, she will. She has not merely art, consummate art-instinct, in her, but she has personality also; and you have often told me that it is personalities, not principles, that move the age.”

“Well, what night shall we go?”

“Let me see. To-day is Tuesday. Let us fix to-morrow. She plays Juliet to-morrow.”

“All right. The Bristol at eight o’clock; and I will get Basil.”

“Not eight, Harry, please. Half-past six. We must be there before the curtain rises. You must see her in the first act, where she meets Romeo.”

“Half-past six! What an hour! It will be like having a meat-tea, or reading an English novel. It must be seven. No gentleman dines before seven. Shall you see Basil between this and then? Or shall I write to him?”

“Dear Basil! I have not laid eyes on him for a week. It is rather horrid of me, as he has sent me my portrait in the most wonderful frame, specially designed by himself, and, though I am a little jealous of the picture for being a whole month younger than I am, I must admit that I delight in it. Perhaps you had better write to him. I don’t want to see him alone. He says things that annoy me. He gives me good advice.”

Lord Henry smiled. “People are very fond of giving away what they need most themselves. It is what I call the depth of generosity.”

“Oh, Basil is the best of fellows, but he seems to me to be just a bit of a Philistine. Since I have known you, Harry, I have discovered that.”

“Basil, my dear boy, puts everything that is charming in him into his work. The consequence is that he has nothing left for life but his prejudices, his principles, and his common sense. The only artists I have ever known who are personally delightful are bad artists. Good artists exist simply in what they make, and consequently are perfectly uninteresting in what they are. A great poet, a really great poet, is the most unpoetical of all creatures. But inferior poets are absolutely fascinating. The worse their rhymes are, the more picturesque they look. The mere fact of having published a book of second-rate sonnets makes a man quite irresistible. He lives the poetry that he cannot write. The others write the poetry that they dare not realize.”

“I wonder is that really so, Harry?” said Dorian Gray, putting some perfume on his handkerchief out of a large, gold-topped bottle that stood on the table. “It must be, if you say it. And now I am off. Imogen is waiting for me. Don’t forget about to-morrow. Good-bye.”

As he left the room, Lord Henry’s heavy eyelids drooped, and he began to think. Certainly few people had ever interested him so much as Dorian Gray, and yet the lad’s mad adoration of some one else caused him not the slightest pang of annoyance or jealousy. He was pleased by it. It made him a more interesting study. He had been always enthralled by the methods of natural science, but the ordinary subject-matter of that science had seemed to him trivial and of no import. And so he had begun by vivisecting himself, as he had ended by vivisecting others. Human life—that appeared to him the one thing worth investigating. Compared to it there was nothing else of any value. It was true that as one watched life in its curious crucible of pain and pleasure, one could not wear over one’s face a mask of glass, nor keep the sulphurous fumes from troubling the brain and making the imagination turbid with monstrous fancies and misshapen dreams. There were poisons so subtle that to know their properties one had to sicken of them. There were maladies so strange that one had to pass through them if one sought to understand their nature. And, yet, what a great reward one received! How wonderful the whole world became to one! To note the curious hard logic of passion, and the emotional coloured life of the intellect—to observe where they met, and where they separated, at what point they were in unison, and at what point they were at discord—there was a delight in that! What matter what the cost was? One could never pay too high a price for any sensation.

He was conscious—and the thought brought a gleam of pleasure into his brown agate eyes—that it was through certain words of his, musical words said with musical utterance, that Dorian Gray’s soul had turned to this white girl and bowed in worship before her. To a large extent the lad was his own creation. He had made him premature. That was something. Ordinary people waited till life disclosed to them its secrets, but to the few, to the elect, the mysteries of life were revealed before the veil was drawn away. Sometimes this was the effect of art, and chiefly of the art of literature, which dealt immediately with the passions and the intellect. But now and then a complex personality took the place and assumed the office of art, was indeed, in its way, a real work of art, life having its elaborate masterpieces, just as poetry has, or sculpture, or painting.

Yes, the lad was premature. He was gathering his harvest while it was yet spring. The pulse and passion of youth were in him, but he was becoming self-conscious. It was delightful to watch him. With his beautiful face, and his beautiful soul, he was a thing to wonder at. It was no matter how it all ended, or was destined to end. He was like one of those gracious figures in a pageant or a play, whose joys seem to be remote from one, but whose sorrows stir one’s sense of beauty, and whose wounds are like red roses.

Soul and body, body and soul—how mysterious they were! There was animalism in the soul, and the body had its moments of spirituality. The senses could refine, and the intellect could degrade. Who could say where the fleshly impulse ceased, or the psychical impulse began? How shallow were the arbitrary definitions of ordinary psychologists! And yet how difficult to decide between the claims of the various schools! Was the soul a shadow seated in the house of sin? Or was the body really in the soul, as Giordano Bruno thought? The separation of spirit from matter was a mystery, and the union of spirit with matter was a mystery also.

He began to wonder whether we could ever make psychology so absolute a science that each little spring of life would be revealed to us. As it was, we always misunderstood ourselves and rarely understood others. Experience was of no ethical value. It was merely the name men gave to their mistakes. Moralists had, as a rule, regarded it as a mode of warning, had claimed for it a certain ethical efficacy in the formation of character, had praised it as something that taught us what to follow and showed us what to avoid. But there was no motive power in experience. It was as little of an active cause as conscience itself. All that it really demonstrated was that our future would be the same as our past, and that the sin we had done once, and with loathing, we would do many times, and with joy.

It was clear to him that the experimental method was the only method by which one could arrive at any scientific analysis of the passions; and certainly Dorian Gray was a subject made to his hand, and seemed to promise rich and fruitful results. His sudden mad love for Sibyl Vane was a psychological phenomenon of no small interest. There was no doubt that curiosity had much to do with it, curiosity and the desire for new experiences, yet it was not a simple, but rather a very complex passion. What there was in it of the purely sensuous instinct of boyhood had been transformed by the workings of the imagination, changed into something that seemed to the lad himself to be remote from sense, and was for that very reason all the more dangerous. It was the passions about whose origin we deceived ourselves that tyrannized most strongly over us. Our weakest motives were those of whose nature we were conscious. It often happened that when we thought we were experimenting on others we were really experimenting on ourselves.

While Lord Henry sat dreaming on these things, a knock came to the door, and his valet entered and reminded him it was time to dress for dinner. He got up and looked out into the street. The sunset had smitten into scarlet gold the upper windows of the houses opposite. The panes glowed like plates of heated metal. The sky above was like a faded rose. He thought of his friend’s young fiery-coloured life and wondered how it was all going to end.

When he arrived home, about half-past twelve o’clock, he saw a telegram lying on the hall table. He opened it and found it was from Dorian Gray. It was to tell him that he was engaged to be married to Sibyl Vane.
“Mother, Mother, I am so happy!” whispered the girl, burying her face in the lap of the faded, tired-looking woman who, with back turned to the shrill intrusive light, was sitting in the one arm-chair that their dingy sitting-room contained. “I am so happy!” she repeated, “and you must be happy, too!”

Mrs. Vane winced and put her thin, bismuth-whitened hands on her daughter’s head. “Happy!” she echoed, “I am only happy, Sibyl, when I see you act. You must not think of anything but your acting. Mr. Isaacs has been very good to us, and we owe him money.”

The girl looked up and pouted. “Money, Mother?” she cried, “what does money matter? Love is more than money.”

“Mr. Isaacs has advanced us fifty pounds to pay off our debts and to get a proper outfit for James. You must not forget that, Sibyl. Fifty pounds is a very large sum. Mr. Isaacs has been most considerate.”

“He is not a gentleman, Mother, and I hate the way he talks to me,” said the girl, rising to her feet and going over to the window.

“I don’t know how we could manage without him,” answered the elder woman querulously.

Sibyl Vane tossed her head and laughed. “We don’t want him any more, Mother. Prince Charming rules life for us now.” Then she paused. A rose shook in her blood and shadowed her cheeks. Quick breath parted the petals of her lips. They trembled. Some southern wind of passion swept over her and stirred the dainty folds of her dress. “I love him,” she said simply.

“Foolish child! foolish child!” was the parrot-phrase flung in answer. The waving of crooked, false-jewelled fingers gave grotesqueness to the words.

The girl laughed again. The joy of a caged bird was in her voice. Her eyes caught the melody and echoed it in radiance, then closed for a moment, as though to hide their secret. When they opened, the mist of a dream had passed across them.

Thin-lipped wisdom spoke at her from the worn chair, hinted at prudence, quoted from that book of cowardice whose author apes the name of common sense. She did not listen. She was free in her prison of passion. Her prince, Prince Charming, was with her. She had called on memory to remake him. She had sent her soul to search for him, and it had brought him back. His kiss burned again upon her mouth. Her eyelids were warm with his breath.

Then wisdom altered its method and spoke of espial and discovery. This young man might be rich. If so, marriage should be thought of. Against the shell of her ear broke the waves of worldly cunning. The arrows of craft shot by her. She saw the thin lips moving, and smiled.

Suddenly she felt the need to speak. The wordy silence troubled her. “Mother, Mother,” she cried, “why does he love me so much? I know why I love him. I love him because he is like what love himself should be. But what does he see in me? I am not worthy of him. And yet—why, I cannot tell—though I feel so much beneath him, I don’t feel humble. I feel proud, terribly proud. Mother, did you love my father as I love Prince Charming?”

The elder woman grew pale beneath the coarse powder that daubed her cheeks, and her dry lips twitched with a spasm of pain. Sybil rushed to her, flung her arms round her neck, and kissed her. “Forgive me, Mother. I know it pains you to talk about our father. But it only pains you because you loved him so much. Don’t look so sad. I am as happy to-day as you were twenty years ago. Ah! let me be happy for ever!”

“My child, you are far too young to think of falling in love. Besides, what do you know of this young man? You don’t even know his name. The whole thing is most inconvenient, and really, when James is going away to Australia, and I have so much to think of, I must say that you should have shown more consideration. However, as I said before, if he is rich ...”

“Ah! Mother, Mother, let me be happy!”

Mrs. Vane glanced at her, and with one of those false theatrical gestures that so often become a mode of second nature to a stage-player, clasped her in her arms. At this moment, the door opened and a young lad with rough brown hair came into the room. He was thick-set of figure, and his hands and feet were large and somewhat clumsy in movement. He was not so finely bred as his sister. One would hardly have guessed the close relationship that existed between them. Mrs. Vane fixed her eyes on him and intensified her smile. She mentally elevated her son to the dignity of an audience. She felt sure that the tableau was interesting.

“You might keep some of your kisses for me, Sibyl, I think,” said the lad with a good-natured grumble.

“Ah! but you don’t like being kissed, Jim,” she cried. “You are a dreadful old bear.” And she ran across the room and hugged him.

James Vane looked into his sister’s face with tenderness. “I want you to come out with me for a walk, Sibyl. I don’t suppose I shall ever see this horrid London again. I am sure I don’t want to.”

“My son, don’t say such dreadful things,” murmured Mrs. Vane, taking up a tawdry theatrical dress, with a sigh, and beginning to patch it. She felt a little disappointed that he had not joined the group. It would have increased the theatrical picturesqueness of the situation.

“Why not, Mother? I mean it.”

“You pain me, my son. I trust you will return from Australia in a position of affluence. I believe there is no society of any kind in the Colonies—nothing that I would call society—so when you have made your fortune, you must come back and assert yourself in London.”

“Society!” muttered the lad. “I don’t want to know anything about that. I should like to make some money to take you and Sibyl off the stage. I hate it.”

“Oh, Jim!” said Sibyl, laughing, “how unkind of you! But are you really going for a walk with me? That will be nice! I was afraid you were going to say good-bye to some of your friends—to Tom Hardy, who gave you that hideous pipe, or Ned Langton, who makes fun of you for smoking it. It is very sweet of you to let me have your last afternoon. Where shall we go? Let us go to the park.”

“I am too shabby,” he answered, frowning. “Only swell people go to the park.”

“Nonsense, Jim,” she whispered, stroking the sleeve of his coat.

He hesitated for a moment. “Very well,” he said at last, “but don’t be too long dressing.” She danced out of the door. One could hear her singing as she ran upstairs. Her little feet pattered overhead.

He walked up and down the room two or three times. Then he turned to the still figure in the chair. “Mother, are my things ready?” he asked.

“Quite ready, James,” she answered, keeping her eyes on her work. For some months past she had felt ill at ease when she was alone with this rough stern son of hers. Her shallow secret nature was troubled when their eyes met. She used to wonder if he suspected anything. The silence, for he made no other observation, became intolerable to her. She began to complain. Women defend themselves by attacking, just as they attack by sudden and strange surrenders. “I hope you will be contented, James, with your sea-faring life,” she said. “You must remember that it is your own choice. You might have entered a solicitor’s office. Solicitors are a very respectable class, and in the country often dine with the best families.”

“I hate offices, and I hate clerks,” he replied. “But you are quite right. I have chosen my own life. All I say is, watch over Sibyl. Don’t let her come to any harm. Mother, you must watch over her.”

“James, you really talk very strangely. Of course I watch over Sibyl.”

“I hear a gentleman comes every night to the theatre and goes behind to talk to her. Is that right? What about that?”

“You are speaking about things you don’t understand, James. In the profession we are accustomed to receive a great deal of most gratifying attention. I myself used to receive many bouquets at one time. That was when acting was really understood. As for Sibyl, I do not know at present whether her attachment is serious or not. But there is no doubt that the young man in question is a perfect gentleman. He is always most polite to me. Besides, he has the appearance of being rich, and the flowers he sends are lovely.”

“You don’t know his name, though,” said the lad harshly.

“No,” answered his mother with a placid expression in her face. “He has not yet revealed his real name. I think it is quite romantic of him. He is probably a member of the aristocracy.”

James Vane bit his lip. “Watch over Sibyl, Mother,” he cried, “watch over her.”

“My son, you distress me very much. Sibyl is always under my special care. Of course, if this gentleman is wealthy, there is no reason why she should not contract an alliance with him. I trust he is one of the aristocracy. He has all the appearance of it, I must say. It might be a most brilliant marriage for Sibyl. They would make a charming couple. His good looks are really quite remarkable; everybody notices them.”

The lad muttered something to himself and drummed on the window-pane with his coarse fingers. He had just turned round to say something when the door opened and Sibyl ran in.

“How serious you both are!” she cried. “What is the matter?”

“Nothing,” he answered. “I suppose one must be serious sometimes. Good-bye, Mother; I will have my dinner at five o’clock. Everything is packed, except my shirts, so you need not trouble.”

“Good-bye, my son,” she answered with a bow of strained stateliness.

She was extremely annoyed at the tone he had adopted with her, and there was something in his look that had made her feel afraid.

“Kiss me, Mother,” said the girl. Her flowerlike lips touched the withered cheek and warmed its frost.

“My child! my child!” cried Mrs. Vane, looking up to the ceiling in search of an imaginary gallery.

“Come, Sibyl,” said her brother impatiently. He hated his mother’s affectations.

They went out into the flickering, wind-blown sunlight and strolled down the dreary Euston Road. The passersby glanced in wonder at the sullen heavy youth who, in coarse, ill-fitting clothes, was in the company of such a graceful, refined-looking girl. He was like a common gardener walking with a rose.

Jim frowned from time to time when he caught the inquisitive glance of some stranger. He had that dislike of being stared at, which comes on geniuses late in life and never leaves the commonplace. Sibyl, however, was quite unconscious of the effect she was producing. Her love was trembling in laughter on her lips. She was thinking of Prince Charming, and, that she might think of him all the more, she did not talk of him, but prattled on about the ship in which Jim was going to sail, about the gold he was certain to find, about the wonderful heiress whose life he was to save from the wicked, red-shirted bushrangers. For he was not to remain a sailor, or a supercargo, or whatever he was going to be. Oh, no! A sailor’s existence was dreadful. Fancy being cooped up in a horrid ship, with the hoarse, hump-backed waves trying to get in, and a black wind blowing the masts down and tearing the sails into long screaming ribands! He was to leave the vessel at Melbourne, bid a polite good-bye to the captain, and go off at once to the gold-fields. Before a week was over he was to come across a large nugget of pure gold, the largest nugget that had ever been discovered, and bring it down to the coast in a waggon guarded by six mounted policemen. The bushrangers were to attack them three times, and be defeated with immense slaughter. Or, no. He was not to go to the gold-fields at all. They were horrid places, where men got intoxicated, and shot each other in bar-rooms, and used bad language. He was to be a nice sheep-farmer, and one evening, as he was riding home, he was to see the beautiful heiress being carried off by a robber on a black horse, and give chase, and rescue her. Of course, she would fall in love with him, and he with her, and they would get married, and come home, and live in an immense house in London. Yes, there were delightful things in store for him. But he must be very good, and not lose his temper, or spend his money foolishly. She was only a year older than he was, but she knew so much more of life. He must be sure, also, to write to her by every mail, and to say his prayers each night before he went to sleep. God was very good, and would watch over him. She would pray for him, too, and in a few years he would come back quite rich and happy.

The lad listened sulkily to her and made no answer. He was heart-sick at leaving home.

Yet it was not this alone that made him gloomy and morose. Inexperienced though he was, he had still a strong sense of the danger of Sibyl’s position. This young dandy who was making love to her could mean her no good. He was a gentleman, and he hated him for that, hated him through some curious race-instinct for which he could not account, and which for that reason was all the more dominant within him. He was conscious also of the shallowness and vanity of his mother’s nature, and in that saw infinite peril for Sibyl and Sibyl’s happiness. Children begin by loving their parents; as they grow older they judge them; sometimes they forgive them.

His mother! He had something on his mind to ask of her, something that he had brooded on for many months of silence. A chance phrase that he had heard at the theatre, a whispered sneer that had reached his ears one night as he waited at the stage-door, had set loose a train of horrible thoughts. He remembered it as if it had been the lash of a hunting-crop across his face. His brows knit together into a wedge-like furrow, and with a twitch of pain he bit his underlip.

“You are not listening to a word I am saying, Jim,” cried Sibyl, “and I am making the most delightful plans for your future. Do say something.”

“What do you want me to say?”

“Oh! that you will be a good boy and not forget us,” she answered, smiling at him.

He shrugged his shoulders. “You are more likely to forget me than I am to forget you, Sibyl.”

She flushed. “What do you mean, Jim?” she asked.

“You have a new friend, I hear. Who is he? Why have you not told me about him? He means you no good.”

“Stop, Jim!” she exclaimed. “You must not say anything against him. I love him.”

“Why, you don’t even know his name,” answered the lad. “Who is he? I have a right to know.”

“He is called Prince Charming. Don’t you like the name. Oh! you silly boy! you should never forget it. If you only saw him, you would think him the most wonderful person in the world. Some day you will meet him—when you come back from Australia. You will like him so much. Everybody likes him, and I ... love him. I wish you could come to the theatre to-night. He is going to be there, and I am to play Juliet. Oh! how I shall play it! Fancy, Jim, to be in love and play Juliet! To have him sitting there! To play for his delight! I am afraid I may frighten the company, frighten or enthrall them. To be in love is to surpass one’s self. Poor dreadful Mr. Isaacs will be shouting ‘genius’ to his loafers at the bar. He has preached me as a dogma; to-night he will announce me as a revelation. I feel it. And it is all his, his only, Prince Charming, my wonderful lover, my god of graces. But I am poor beside him. Poor? What does that matter? When poverty creeps in at the door, love flies in through the window. Our proverbs want rewriting. They were made in winter, and it is summer now; spring-time for me, I think, a very dance of blossoms in blue skies.”

“He is a gentleman,” said the lad sullenly.

“A prince!” she cried musically. “What more do you want?”

“He wants to enslave you.”

“I shudder at the thought of being free.”

“I want you to beware of him.”

“To see him is to worship him; to know him is to trust him.”

“Sibyl, you are mad about him.”

She laughed and took his arm. “You dear old Jim, you talk as if you were a hundred. Some day you will be in love yourself. Then you will know what it is. Don’t look so sulky. Surely you should be glad to think that, though you are going away, you leave me happier than I have ever been before. Life has been hard for us both, terribly hard and difficult. But it will be different now. You are going to a new world, and I have found one. Here are two chairs; let us sit down and see the smart people go by.”

They took their seats amidst a crowd of watchers. The tulip-beds across the road flamed like throbbing rings of fire. A white dust—tremulous cloud of orris-root it seemed—hung in the panting air. The brightly coloured parasols danced and dipped like monstrous butterflies.

She made her brother talk of himself, his hopes, his prospects. He spoke slowly and with effort. They passed words to each other as players at a game pass counters. Sibyl felt oppressed. She could not communicate her joy. A faint smile curving that sullen mouth was all the echo she could win. After some time she became silent. Suddenly she caught a glimpse of golden hair and laughing lips, and in an open carriage with two ladies Dorian Gray drove past.

She started to her feet. “There he is!” she cried.

“Who?” said Jim Vane.

“Prince Charming,” she answered, looking after the victoria.

He jumped up and seized her roughly by the arm. “Show him to me. Which is he? Point him out. I must see him!” he exclaimed; but at that moment the Duke of Berwick’s four-in-hand came between, and when it had left the space clear, the carriage had swept out of the park.

“He is gone,” murmured Sibyl sadly. “I wish you had seen him.”

“I wish I had, for as sure as there is a God in heaven, if he ever does you any wrong, I shall kill him.”

She looked at him in horror. He repeated his words. They cut the air like a dagger. The people round began to gape. A lady standing close to her tittered.

“Come away, Jim; come away,” she whispered. He followed her doggedly as she passed through the crowd. He felt glad at what he had said.

When they reached the Achilles Statue, she turned round. There was pity in her eyes that became laughter on her lips. She shook her head at him. “You are foolish, Jim, utterly foolish; a bad-tempered boy, that is all. How can you say such horrible things? You don’t know what you are talking about. You are simply jealous and unkind. Ah! I wish you would fall in love. Love makes people good, and what you said was wicked.”

“I am sixteen,” he answered, “and I know what I am about. Mother is no help to you. She doesn’t understand how to look after you. I wish now that I was not going to Australia at all. I have a great mind to chuck the whole thing up. I would, if my articles hadn’t been signed.”

“Oh, don’t be so serious, Jim. You are like one of the heroes of those silly melodramas Mother used to be so fond of acting in. I am not going to quarrel with you. I have seen him, and oh! to see him is perfect happiness. We won’t quarrel. I know you would never harm any one I love, would you?”

“Not as long as you love him, I suppose,” was the sullen answer.

“I shall love him for ever!” she cried.

“And he?”

“For ever, too!”

“He had better.”

She shrank from him. Then she laughed and put her hand on his arm. He was merely a boy.

At the Marble Arch they hailed an omnibus, which left them close to their shabby home in the Euston Road. It was after five o’clock, and Sibyl had to lie down for a couple of hours before acting. Jim insisted that she should do so. He said that he would sooner part with her when their mother was not present. She would be sure to make a scene, and he detested scenes of every kind.

In Sybil’s own room they parted. There was jealousy in the lad’s heart, and a fierce murderous hatred of the stranger who, as it seemed to him, had come between them. Yet, when her arms were flung round his neck, and her fingers strayed through his hair, he softened and kissed her with real affection. There were tears in his eyes as he went downstairs.

His mother was waiting for him below. She grumbled at his unpunctuality, as he entered. He made no answer, but sat down to his meagre meal. The flies buzzed round the table and crawled over the stained cloth. Through the rumble of omnibuses, and the clatter of street-cabs, he could hear the droning voice devouring each minute that was left to him.

After some time, he thrust away his plate and put his head in his hands. He felt that he had a right to know. It should have been told to him before, if it was as he suspected. Leaden with fear, his mother watched him. Words dropped mechanically from her lips. A tattered lace handkerchief twitched in her fingers. When the clock struck six, he got up and went to the door. Then he turned back and looked at her. Their eyes met. In hers he saw a wild appeal for mercy. It enraged him.

“Mother, I have something to ask you,” he said. Her eyes wandered vaguely about the room. She made no answer. “Tell me the truth. I have a right to know. Were you married to my father?”

She heaved a deep sigh. It was a sigh of relief. The terrible moment, the moment that night and day, for weeks and months, she had dreaded, had come at last, and yet she felt no terror. Indeed, in some measure it was a disappointment to her. The vulgar directness of the question called for a direct answer. The situation had not been gradually led up to. It was crude. It reminded her of a bad rehearsal.

“No,” she answered, wondering at the harsh simplicity of life.

“My father was a scoundrel then!” cried the lad, clenching his fists.

She shook her head. “I knew he was not free. We loved each other very much. If he had lived, he would have made provision for us. Don’t speak against him, my son. He was your father, and a gentleman. Indeed, he was highly connected.”

An oath broke from his lips. “I don’t care for myself,” he exclaimed, “but don’t let Sibyl.... It is a gentleman, isn’t it, who is in love with her, or says he is? Highly connected, too, I suppose.”

For a moment a hideous sense of humiliation came over the woman. Her head drooped. She wiped her eyes with shaking hands. “Sibyl has a mother,” she murmured; “I had none.”

The lad was touched. He went towards her, and stooping down, he kissed her. “I am sorry if I have pained you by asking about my father,” he said, “but I could not help it. I must go now. Good-bye. Don’t forget that you will have only one child now to look after, and believe me that if this man wrongs my sister, I will find out who he is, track him down, and kill him like a dog. I swear it.”

The exaggerated folly of the threat, the passionate gesture that accompanied it, the mad melodramatic words, made life seem more vivid to her. She was familiar with the atmosphere. She breathed more freely, and for the first time for many months she really admired her son. She would have liked to have continued the scene on the same emotional scale, but he cut her short. Trunks had to be carried down and mufflers looked for. The lodging-house drudge bustled in and out. There was the bargaining with the cabman. The moment was lost in vulgar details. It was with a renewed feeling of disappointment that she waved the tattered lace handkerchief from the window, as her son drove away. She was conscious that a great opportunity had been wasted. She consoled herself by telling Sibyl how desolate she felt her life would be, now that she had only one child to look after. She remembered the phrase. It had pleased her. Of the threat she said nothing. It was vividly and dramatically expressed. She felt that they would all laugh at it some day.
“I suppose you have heard the news, Basil?” said Lord Henry that evening as Hallward was shown into a little private room at the Bristol where dinner had been laid for three.

“No, Harry,” answered the artist, giving his hat and coat to the bowing waiter. “What is it? Nothing about politics, I hope! They don’t interest me. There is hardly a single person in the House of Commons worth painting, though many of them would be the better for a little whitewashing.”

“Dorian Gray is engaged to be married,” said Lord Henry, watching him as he spoke.

Hallward started and then frowned. “Dorian engaged to be married!” he cried. “Impossible!”

“It is perfectly true.”

“To whom?”

“To some little actress or other.”

“I can’t believe it. Dorian is far too sensible.”

“Dorian is far too wise not to do foolish things now and then, my dear Basil.”

“Marriage is hardly a thing that one can do now and then, Harry.”

“Except in America,” rejoined Lord Henry languidly. “But I didn’t say he was married. I said he was engaged to be married. There is a great difference. I have a distinct remembrance of being married, but I have no recollection at all of being engaged. I am inclined to think that I never was engaged.”

“But think of Dorian’s birth, and position, and wealth. It would be absurd for him to marry so much beneath him.”

“If you want to make him marry this girl, tell him that, Basil. He is sure to do it, then. Whenever a man does a thoroughly stupid thing, it is always from the noblest motives.”

“I hope the girl is good, Harry. I don’t want to see Dorian tied to some vile creature, who might degrade his nature and ruin his intellect.”

“Oh, she is better than good—she is beautiful,” murmured Lord Henry, sipping a glass of vermouth and orange-bitters. “Dorian says she is beautiful, and he is not often wrong about things of that kind. Your portrait of him has quickened his appreciation of the personal appearance of other people. It has had that excellent effect, amongst others. We are to see her to-night, if that boy doesn’t forget his appointment.”

“Are you serious?”

“Quite serious, Basil. I should be miserable if I thought I should ever be more serious than I am at the present moment.”

“But do you approve of it, Harry?” asked the painter, walking up and down the room and biting his lip. “You can’t approve of it, possibly. It is some silly infatuation.”

“I never approve, or disapprove, of anything now. It is an absurd attitude to take towards life. We are not sent into the world to air our moral prejudices. I never take any notice of what common people say, and I never interfere with what charming people do. If a personality fascinates me, whatever mode of expression that personality selects is absolutely delightful to me. Dorian Gray falls in love with a beautiful girl who acts Juliet, and proposes to marry her. Why not? If he wedded Messalina, he would be none the less interesting. You know I am not a champion of marriage. The real drawback to marriage is that it makes one unselfish. And unselfish people are colourless. They lack individuality. Still, there are certain temperaments that marriage makes more complex. They retain their egotism, and add to it many other egos. They are forced to have more than one life. They become more highly organized, and to be highly organized is, I should fancy, the object of man’s existence. Besides, every experience is of value, and whatever one may say against marriage, it is certainly an experience. I hope that Dorian Gray will make this girl his wife, passionately adore her for six months, and then suddenly become fascinated by some one else. He would be a wonderful study.”

“You don’t mean a single word of all that, Harry; you know you don’t. If Dorian Gray’s life were spoiled, no one would be sorrier than yourself. You are much better than you pretend to be.”

Lord Henry laughed. “The reason we all like to think so well of others is that we are all afraid for ourselves. The basis of optimism is sheer terror. We think that we are generous because we credit our neighbour with the possession of those virtues that are likely to be a benefit to us. We praise the banker that we may overdraw our account, and find good qualities in the highwayman in the hope that he may spare our pockets. I mean everything that I have said. I have the greatest contempt for optimism. As for a spoiled life, no life is spoiled but one whose growth is arrested. If you want to mar a nature, you have merely to reform it. As for marriage, of course that would be silly, but there are other and more interesting bonds between men and women. I will certainly encourage them. They have the charm of being fashionable. But here is Dorian himself. He will tell you more than I can.”

“My dear Harry, my dear Basil, you must both congratulate me!” said the lad, throwing off his evening cape with its satin-lined wings and shaking each of his friends by the hand in turn. “I have never been so happy. Of course, it is sudden—all really delightful things are. And yet it seems to me to be the one thing I have been looking for all my life.” He was flushed with excitement and pleasure, and looked extraordinarily handsome.

“I hope you will always be very happy, Dorian,” said Hallward, “but I don’t quite forgive you for not having let me know of your engagement. You let Harry know.”

“And I don’t forgive you for being late for dinner,” broke in Lord Henry, putting his hand on the lad’s shoulder and smiling as he spoke. “Come, let us sit down and try what the new chef here is like, and then you will tell us how it all came about.”

“There is really not much to tell,” cried Dorian as they took their seats at the small round table. “What happened was simply this. After I left you yesterday evening, Harry, I dressed, had some dinner at that little Italian restaurant in Rupert Street you introduced me to, and went down at eight o’clock to the theatre. Sibyl was playing Rosalind. Of course, the scenery was dreadful and the Orlando absurd. But Sibyl! You should have seen her! When she came on in her boy’s clothes, she was perfectly wonderful. She wore a moss-coloured velvet jerkin with cinnamon sleeves, slim, brown, cross-gartered hose, a dainty little green cap with a hawk’s feather caught in a jewel, and a hooded cloak lined with dull red. She had never seemed to me more exquisite. She had all the delicate grace of that Tanagra figurine that you have in your studio, Basil. Her hair clustered round her face like dark leaves round a pale rose. As for her acting—well, you shall see her to-night. She is simply a born artist. I sat in the dingy box absolutely enthralled. I forgot that I was in London and in the nineteenth century. I was away with my love in a forest that no man had ever seen. After the performance was over, I went behind and spoke to her. As we were sitting together, suddenly there came into her eyes a look that I had never seen there before. My lips moved towards hers. We kissed each other. I can’t describe to you what I felt at that moment. It seemed to me that all my life had been narrowed to one perfect point of rose-coloured joy. She trembled all over and shook like a white narcissus. Then she flung herself on her knees and kissed my hands. I feel that I should not tell you all this, but I can’t help it. Of course, our engagement is a dead secret. She has not even told her own mother. I don’t know what my guardians will say. Lord Radley is sure to be furious. I don’t care. I shall be of age in less than a year, and then I can do what I like. I have been right, Basil, haven’t I, to take my love out of poetry and to find my wife in Shakespeare’s plays? Lips that Shakespeare taught to speak have whispered their secret in my ear. I have had the arms of Rosalind around me, and kissed Juliet on the mouth.”

“Yes, Dorian, I suppose you were right,” said Hallward slowly.

“Have you seen her to-day?” asked Lord Henry.

Dorian Gray shook his head. “I left her in the forest of Arden; I shall find her in an orchard in Verona.”

Lord Henry sipped his champagne in a meditative manner. “At what particular point did you mention the word marriage, Dorian? And what did she say in answer? Perhaps you forgot all about it.”

“My dear Harry, I did not treat it as a business transaction, and I did not make any formal proposal. I told her that I loved her, and she said she was not worthy to be my wife. Not worthy! Why, the whole world is nothing to me compared with her.”

“Women are wonderfully practical,” murmured Lord Henry, “much more practical than we are. In situations of that kind we often forget to say anything about marriage, and they always remind us.”

Hallward laid his hand upon his arm. “Don’t, Harry. You have annoyed Dorian. He is not like other men. He would never bring misery upon any one. His nature is too fine for that.”

Lord Henry looked across the table. “Dorian is never annoyed with me,” he answered. “I asked the question for the best reason possible, for the only reason, indeed, that excuses one for asking any question—simple curiosity. I have a theory that it is always the women who propose to us, and not we who propose to the women. Except, of course, in middle-class life. But then the middle classes are not modern.”

Dorian Gray laughed, and tossed his head. “You are quite incorrigible, Harry; but I don’t mind. It is impossible to be angry with you. When you see Sibyl Vane, you will feel that the man who could wrong her would be a beast, a beast without a heart. I cannot understand how any one can wish to shame the thing he loves. I love Sibyl Vane. I want to place her on a pedestal of gold and to see the world worship the woman who is mine. What is marriage? An irrevocable vow. You mock at it for that. Ah! don’t mock. It is an irrevocable vow that I want to take. Her trust makes me faithful, her belief makes me good. When I am with her, I regret all that you have taught me. I become different from what you have known me to be. I am changed, and the mere touch of Sibyl Vane’s hand makes me forget you and all your wrong, fascinating, poisonous, delightful theories.”

“And those are ...?” asked Lord Henry, helping himself to some salad.

“Oh, your theories about life, your theories about love, your theories about pleasure. All your theories, in fact, Harry.”

“Pleasure is the only thing worth having a theory about,” he answered in his slow melodious voice. “But I am afraid I cannot claim my theory as my own. It belongs to Nature, not to me. Pleasure is Nature’s test, her sign of approval. When we are happy, we are always good, but when we are good, we are not always happy.”

“Ah! but what do you mean by good?” cried Basil Hallward.

“Yes,” echoed Dorian, leaning back in his chair and looking at Lord Henry over the heavy clusters of purple-lipped irises that stood in the centre of the table, “what do you mean by good, Harry?”

“To be good is to be in harmony with one’s self,” he replied, touching the thin stem of his glass with his pale, fine-pointed fingers. “Discord is to be forced to be in harmony with others. One’s own life—that is the important thing. As for the lives of one’s neighbours, if one wishes to be a prig or a Puritan, one can flaunt one’s moral views about them, but they are not one’s concern. Besides, individualism has really the higher aim. Modern morality consists in accepting the standard of one’s age. I consider that for any man of culture to accept the standard of his age is a form of the grossest immorality.”

“But, surely, if one lives merely for one’s self, Harry, one pays a terrible price for doing so?” suggested the painter.

“Yes, we are overcharged for everything nowadays. I should fancy that the real tragedy of the poor is that they can afford nothing but self-denial. Beautiful sins, like beautiful things, are the privilege of the rich.”

“One has to pay in other ways but money.”

“What sort of ways, Basil?”

“Oh! I should fancy in remorse, in suffering, in ... well, in the consciousness of degradation.”

Lord Henry shrugged his shoulders. “My dear fellow, mediæval art is charming, but mediæval emotions are out of date. One can use them in fiction, of course. But then the only things that one can use in fiction are the things that one has ceased to use in fact. Believe me, no civilized man ever regrets a pleasure, and no uncivilized man ever knows what a pleasure is.”

“I know what pleasure is,” cried Dorian Gray. “It is to adore some one.”

“That is certainly better than being adored,” he answered, toying with some fruits. “Being adored is a nuisance. Women treat us just as humanity treats its gods. They worship us, and are always bothering us to do something for them.”

“I should have said that whatever they ask for they had first given to us,” murmured the lad gravely. “They create love in our natures. They have a right to demand it back.”

“That is quite true, Dorian,” cried Hallward.

“Nothing is ever quite true,” said Lord Henry.

“This is,” interrupted Dorian. “You must admit, Harry, that women give to men the very gold of their lives.”

“Possibly,” he sighed, “but they invariably want it back in such very small change. That is the worry. Women, as some witty Frenchman once put it, inspire us with the desire to do masterpieces and always prevent us from carrying them out.”

“Harry, you are dreadful! I don’t know why I like you so much.”

“You will always like me, Dorian,” he replied. “Will you have some coffee, you fellows? Waiter, bring coffee, and fine-champagne, and some cigarettes. No, don’t mind the cigarettes—I have some. Basil, I can’t allow you to smoke cigars. You must have a cigarette. A cigarette is the perfect type of a perfect pleasure. It is exquisite, and it leaves one unsatisfied. What more can one want? Yes, Dorian, you will always be fond of me. I represent to you all the sins you have never had the courage to commit.”

“What nonsense you talk, Harry!” cried the lad, taking a light from a fire-breathing silver dragon that the waiter had placed on the table. “Let us go down to the theatre. When Sibyl comes on the stage you will have a new ideal of life. She will represent something to you that you have never known.”

“I have known everything,” said Lord Henry, with a tired look in his eyes, “but I am always ready for a new emotion. I am afraid, however, that, for me at any rate, there is no such thing. Still, your wonderful girl may thrill me. I love acting. It is so much more real than life. Let us go. Dorian, you will come with me. I am so sorry, Basil, but there is only room for two in the brougham. You must follow us in a hansom.”

They got up and put on their coats, sipping their coffee standing. The painter was silent and preoccupied. There was a gloom over him. He could not bear this marriage, and yet it seemed to him to be better than many other things that might have happened. After a few minutes, they all passed downstairs. He drove off by himself, as had been arranged, and watched the flashing lights of the little brougham in front of him. A strange sense of loss came over him. He felt that Dorian Gray would never again be to him all that he had been in the past. Life had come between them.... His eyes darkened, and the crowded flaring streets became blurred to his eyes. When the cab drew up at the theatre, it seemed to him that he had grown years older.
For some reason or other, the house was crowded that night, and the fat Jew manager who met them at the door was beaming from ear to ear with an oily tremulous smile. He escorted them to their box with a sort of pompous humility, waving his fat jewelled hands and talking at the top of his voice. Dorian Gray loathed him more than ever. He felt as if he had come to look for Miranda and had been met by Caliban. Lord Henry, upon the other hand, rather liked him. At least he declared he did, and insisted on shaking him by the hand and assuring him that he was proud to meet a man who had discovered a real genius and gone bankrupt over a poet. Hallward amused himself with watching the faces in the pit. The heat was terribly oppressive, and the huge sunlight flamed like a monstrous dahlia with petals of yellow fire. The youths in the gallery had taken off their coats and waistcoats and hung them over the side. They talked to each other across the theatre and shared their oranges with the tawdry girls who sat beside them. Some women were laughing in the pit. Their voices were horribly shrill and discordant. The sound of the popping of corks came from the bar.

“What a place to find one’s divinity in!” said Lord Henry.

“Yes!” answered Dorian Gray. “It was here I found her, and she is divine beyond all living things. When she acts, you will forget everything. These common rough people, with their coarse faces and brutal gestures, become quite different when she is on the stage. They sit silently and watch her. They weep and laugh as she wills them to do. She makes them as responsive as a violin. She spiritualizes them, and one feels that they are of the same flesh and blood as one’s self.”

“The same flesh and blood as one’s self! Oh, I hope not!” exclaimed Lord Henry, who was scanning the occupants of the gallery through his opera-glass.

“Don’t pay any attention to him, Dorian,” said the painter. “I understand what you mean, and I believe in this girl. Any one you love must be marvellous, and any girl who has the effect you describe must be fine and noble. To spiritualize one’s age—that is something worth doing. If this girl can give a soul to those who have lived without one, if she can create the sense of beauty in people whose lives have been sordid and ugly, if she can strip them of their selfishness and lend them tears for sorrows that are not their own, she is worthy of all your adoration, worthy of the adoration of the world. This marriage is quite right. I did not think so at first, but I admit it now. The gods made Sibyl Vane for you. Without her you would have been incomplete.”

“Thanks, Basil,” answered Dorian Gray, pressing his hand. “I knew that you would understand me. Harry is so cynical, he terrifies me. But here is the orchestra. It is quite dreadful, but it only lasts for about five minutes. Then the curtain rises, and you will see the girl to whom I am going to give all my life, to whom I have given everything that is good in me.”

A quarter of an hour afterwards, amidst an extraordinary turmoil of applause, Sibyl Vane stepped on to the stage. Yes, she was certainly lovely to look at—one of the loveliest creatures, Lord Henry thought, that he had ever seen. There was something of the fawn in her shy grace and startled eyes. A faint blush, like the shadow of a rose in a mirror of silver, came to her cheeks as she glanced at the crowded enthusiastic house. She stepped back a few paces and her lips seemed to tremble. Basil Hallward leaped to his feet and began to applaud. Motionless, and as one in a dream, sat Dorian Gray, gazing at her. Lord Henry peered through his glasses, murmuring, “Charming! charming!”

The scene was the hall of Capulet’s house, and Romeo in his pilgrim’s dress had entered with Mercutio and his other friends. The band, such as it was, struck up a few bars of music, and the dance began. Through the crowd of ungainly, shabbily dressed actors, Sibyl Vane moved like a creature from a finer world. Her body swayed, while she danced, as a plant sways in the water. The curves of her throat were the curves of a white lily. Her hands seemed to be made of cool ivory.

Yet she was curiously listless. She showed no sign of joy when her eyes rested on Romeo. The few words she had to speak—

Good pilgrim, you do wrong your hand too much,
    Which mannerly devotion shows in this;
For saints have hands that pilgrims’ hands do touch,
    And palm to palm is holy palmers’ kiss—

with the brief dialogue that follows, were spoken in a thoroughly artificial manner. The voice was exquisite, but from the point of view of tone it was absolutely false. It was wrong in colour. It took away all the life from the verse. It made the passion unreal.

Dorian Gray grew pale as he watched her. He was puzzled and anxious. Neither of his friends dared to say anything to him. She seemed to them to be absolutely incompetent. They were horribly disappointed.

Yet they felt that the true test of any Juliet is the balcony scene of the second act. They waited for that. If she failed there, there was nothing in her.

She looked charming as she came out in the moonlight. That could not be denied. But the staginess of her acting was unbearable, and grew worse as she went on. Her gestures became absurdly artificial. She overemphasized everything that she had to say. The beautiful passage—

Thou knowest the mask of night is on my face,
Else would a maiden blush bepaint my cheek
For that which thou hast heard me speak to-night—

was declaimed with the painful precision of a schoolgirl who has been taught to recite by some second-rate professor of elocution. When she leaned over the balcony and came to those wonderful lines—

Although I joy in thee,
I have no joy of this contract to-night:
It is too rash, too unadvised, too sudden;
Too like the lightning, which doth cease to be
Ere one can say, “It lightens.” Sweet, good-night!
This bud of love by summer’s ripening breath
May prove a beauteous flower when next we meet—

she spoke the words as though they conveyed no meaning to her. It was not nervousness. Indeed, so far from being nervous, she was absolutely self-contained. It was simply bad art. She was a complete failure.

Even the common uneducated audience of the pit and gallery lost their interest in the play. They got restless, and began to talk loudly and to whistle. The Jew manager, who was standing at the back of the dress-circle, stamped and swore with rage. The only person unmoved was the girl herself.

When the second act was over, there came a storm of hisses, and Lord Henry got up from his chair and put on his coat. “She is quite beautiful, Dorian,” he said, “but she can’t act. Let us go.”

“I am going to see the play through,” answered the lad, in a hard bitter voice. “I am awfully sorry that I have made you waste an evening, Harry. I apologize to you both.”

“My dear Dorian, I should think Miss Vane was ill,” interrupted Hallward. “We will come some other night.”

“I wish she were ill,” he rejoined. “But she seems to me to be simply callous and cold. She has entirely altered. Last night she was a great artist. This evening she is merely a commonplace mediocre actress.”

“Don’t talk like that about any one you love, Dorian. Love is a more wonderful thing than art.”

“They are both simply forms of imitation,” remarked Lord Henry. “But do let us go. Dorian, you must not stay here any longer. It is not good for one’s morals to see bad acting. Besides, I don’t suppose you will want your wife to act, so what does it matter if she plays Juliet like a wooden doll? She is very lovely, and if she knows as little about life as she does about acting, she will be a delightful experience. There are only two kinds of people who are really fascinating—people who know absolutely everything, and people who know absolutely nothing. Good heavens, my dear boy, don’t look so tragic! The secret of remaining young is never to have an emotion that is unbecoming. Come to the club with Basil and myself. We will smoke cigarettes and drink to the beauty of Sibyl Vane. She is beautiful. What more can you want?”

“Go away, Harry,” cried the lad. “I want to be alone. Basil, you must go. Ah! can’t you see that my heart is breaking?” The hot tears came to his eyes. His lips trembled, and rushing to the back of the box, he leaned up against the wall, hiding his face in his hands.

“Let us go, Basil,” said Lord Henry with a strange tenderness in his voice, and the two young men passed out together.

A few moments afterwards the footlights flared up and the curtain rose on the third act. Dorian Gray went back to his seat. He looked pale, and proud, and indifferent. The play dragged on, and seemed interminable. Half of the audience went out, tramping in heavy boots and laughing. The whole thing was a fiasco. The last act was played to almost empty benches. The curtain went down on a titter and some groans.

As soon as it was over, Dorian Gray rushed behind the scenes into the greenroom. The girl was standing there alone, with a look of triumph on her face. Her eyes were lit with an exquisite fire. There was a radiance about her. Her parted lips were smiling over some secret of their own.

When he entered, she looked at him, and an expression of infinite joy came over her. “How badly I acted to-night, Dorian!” she cried.

“Horribly!” he answered, gazing at her in amazement. “Horribly! It was dreadful. Are you ill? You have no idea what it was. You have no idea what I suffered.”

The girl smiled. “Dorian,” she answered, lingering over his name with long-drawn music in her voice, as though it were sweeter than honey to the red petals of her mouth. “Dorian, you should have understood. But you understand now, don’t you?”

“Understand what?” he asked, angrily.

“Why I was so bad to-night. Why I shall always be bad. Why I shall never act well again.”

He shrugged his shoulders. “You are ill, I suppose. When you are ill you shouldn’t act. You make yourself ridiculous. My friends were bored. I was bored.”

She seemed not to listen to him. She was transfigured with joy. An ecstasy of happiness dominated her.

“Dorian, Dorian,” she cried, “before I knew you, acting was the one reality of my life. It was only in the theatre that I lived. I thought that it was all true. I was Rosalind one night and Portia the other. The joy of Beatrice was my joy, and the sorrows of Cordelia were mine also. I believed in everything. The common people who acted with me seemed to me to be godlike. The painted scenes were my world. I knew nothing but shadows, and I thought them real. You came—oh, my beautiful love!—and you freed my soul from prison. You taught me what reality really is. To-night, for the first time in my life, I saw through the hollowness, the sham, the silliness of the empty pageant in which I had always played. To-night, for the first time, I became conscious that the Romeo was hideous, and old, and painted, that the moonlight in the orchard was false, that the scenery was vulgar, and that the words I had to speak were unreal, were not my words, were not what I wanted to say. You had brought me something higher, something of which all art is but a reflection. You had made me understand what love really is. My love! My love! Prince Charming! Prince of life! I have grown sick of shadows. You are more to me than all art can ever be. What have I to do with the puppets of a play? When I came on to-night, I could not understand how it was that everything had gone from me. I thought that I was going to be wonderful. I found that I could do nothing. Suddenly it dawned on my soul what it all meant. The knowledge was exquisite to me. I heard them hissing, and I smiled. What could they know of love such as ours? Take me away, Dorian—take me away with you, where we can be quite alone. I hate the stage. I might mimic a passion that I do not feel, but I cannot mimic one that burns me like fire. Oh, Dorian, Dorian, you understand now what it signifies? Even if I could do it, it would be profanation for me to play at being in love. You have made me see that.”

He flung himself down on the sofa and turned away his face. “You have killed my love,” he muttered.

She looked at him in wonder and laughed. He made no answer. She came across to him, and with her little fingers stroked his hair. She knelt down and pressed his hands to her lips. He drew them away, and a shudder ran through him.

Then he leaped up and went to the door. “Yes,” he cried, “you have killed my love. You used to stir my imagination. Now you don’t even stir my curiosity. You simply produce no effect. I loved you because you were marvellous, because you had genius and intellect, because you realized the dreams of great poets and gave shape and substance to the shadows of art. You have thrown it all away. You are shallow and stupid. My God! how mad I was to love you! What a fool I have been! You are nothing to me now. I will never see you again. I will never think of you. I will never mention your name. You don’t know what you were to me, once. Why, once ... Oh, I can’t bear to think of it! I wish I had never laid eyes upon you! You have spoiled the romance of my life. How little you can know of love, if you say it mars your art! Without your art, you are nothing. I would have made you famous, splendid, magnificent. The world would have worshipped you, and you would have borne my name. What are you now? A third-rate actress with a pretty face.”

The girl grew white, and trembled. She clenched her hands together, and her voice seemed to catch in her throat. “You are not serious, Dorian?” she murmured. “You are acting.”

“Acting! I leave that to you. You do it so well,” he answered bitterly.

She rose from her knees and, with a piteous expression of pain in her face, came across the room to him. She put her hand upon his arm and looked into his eyes. He thrust her back. “Don’t touch me!” he cried.

A low moan broke from her, and she flung herself at his feet and lay there like a trampled flower. “Dorian, Dorian, don’t leave me!” she whispered. “I am so sorry I didn’t act well. I was thinking of you all the time. But I will try—indeed, I will try. It came so suddenly across me, my love for you. I think I should never have known it if you had not kissed me—if we had not kissed each other. Kiss me again, my love. Don’t go away from me. I couldn’t bear it. Oh! don’t go away from me. My brother ... No; never mind. He didn’t mean it. He was in jest.... But you, oh! can’t you forgive me for to-night? I will work so hard and try to improve. Don’t be cruel to me, because I love you better than anything in the world. After all, it is only once that I have not pleased you. But you are quite right, Dorian. I should have shown myself more of an artist. It was foolish of me, and yet I couldn’t help it. Oh, don’t leave me, don’t leave me.” A fit of passionate sobbing choked her. She crouched on the floor like a wounded thing, and Dorian Gray, with his beautiful eyes, looked down at her, and his chiselled lips curled in exquisite disdain. There is always something ridiculous about the emotions of people whom one has ceased to love. Sibyl Vane seemed to him to be absurdly melodramatic. Her tears and sobs annoyed him.

“I am going,” he said at last in his calm clear voice. “I don’t wish to be unkind, but I can’t see you again. You have disappointed me.”

She wept silently, and made no answer, but crept nearer. Her little hands stretched blindly out, and appeared to be seeking for him. He turned on his heel and left the room. In a few moments he was out of the theatre.

Where he went to he hardly knew. He remembered wandering through dimly lit streets, past gaunt, black-shadowed archways and evil-looking houses. Women with hoarse voices and harsh laughter had called after him. Drunkards had reeled by, cursing and chattering to themselves like monstrous apes. He had seen grotesque children huddled upon door-steps, and heard shrieks and oaths from gloomy courts.

As the dawn was just breaking, he found himself close to Covent Garden. The darkness lifted, and, flushed with faint fires, the sky hollowed itself into a perfect pearl. Huge carts filled with nodding lilies rumbled slowly down the polished empty street. The air was heavy with the perfume of the flowers, and their beauty seemed to bring him an anodyne for his pain. He followed into the market and watched the men unloading their waggons. A white-smocked carter offered him some cherries. He thanked him, wondered why he refused to accept any money for them, and began to eat them listlessly. They had been plucked at midnight, and the coldness of the moon had entered into them. A long line of boys carrying crates of striped tulips, and of yellow and red roses, defiled in front of him, threading their way through the huge, jade-green piles of vegetables. Under the portico, with its grey, sun-bleached pillars, loitered a troop of draggled bareheaded girls, waiting for the auction to be over. Others crowded round the swinging doors of the coffee-house in the piazza. The heavy cart-horses slipped and stamped upon the rough stones, shaking their bells and trappings. Some of the drivers were lying asleep on a pile of sacks. Iris-necked and pink-footed, the pigeons ran about picking up seeds.

After a little while, he hailed a hansom and drove home. For a few moments he loitered upon the doorstep, looking round at the silent square, with its blank, close-shuttered windows and its staring blinds. The sky was pure opal now, and the roofs of the houses glistened like silver against it. From some chimney opposite a thin wreath of smoke was rising. It curled, a violet riband, through the nacre-coloured air.

In the huge gilt Venetian lantern, spoil of some Doge’s barge, that hung from the ceiling of the great, oak-panelled hall of entrance, lights were still burning from three flickering jets: thin blue petals of flame they seemed, rimmed with white fire. He turned them out and, having thrown his hat and cape on the table, passed through the library towards the door of his bedroom, a large octagonal chamber on the ground floor that, in his new-born feeling for luxury, he had just had decorated for himself and hung with some curious Renaissance tapestries that had been discovered stored in a disused attic at Selby Royal. As he was turning the handle of the door, his eye fell upon the portrait Basil Hallward had painted of him. He started back as if in surprise. Then he went on into his own room, looking somewhat puzzled. After he had taken the button-hole out of his coat, he seemed to hesitate. Finally, he came back, went over to the picture, and examined it. In the dim arrested light that struggled through the cream-coloured silk blinds, the face appeared to him to be a little changed. The expression looked different. One would have said that there was a touch of cruelty in the mouth. It was certainly strange.

He turned round and, walking to the window, drew up the blind. The bright dawn flooded the room and swept the fantastic shadows into dusky corners, where they lay shuddering. But the strange expression that he had noticed in the face of the portrait seemed to linger there, to be more intensified even. The quivering ardent sunlight showed him the lines of cruelty round the mouth as clearly as if he had been looking into a mirror after he had done some dreadful thing.

He winced and, taking up from the table an oval glass framed in ivory Cupids, one of Lord Henry’s many presents to him, glanced hurriedly into its polished depths. No line like that warped his red lips. What did it mean?

He rubbed his eyes, and came close to the picture, and examined it again. There were no signs of any change when he looked into the actual painting, and yet there was no doubt that the whole expression had altered. It was not a mere fancy of his own. The thing was horribly apparent.

He threw himself into a chair and began to think. Suddenly there flashed across his mind what he had said in Basil Hallward’s studio the day the picture had been finished. Yes, he remembered it perfectly. He had uttered a mad wish that he himself might remain young, and the portrait grow old; that his own beauty might be untarnished, and the face on the canvas bear the burden of his passions and his sins; that the painted image might be seared with the lines of suffering and thought, and that he might keep all the delicate bloom and loveliness of his then just conscious boyhood. Surely his wish had not been fulfilled? Such things were impossible. It seemed monstrous even to think of them. And, yet, there was the picture before him, with the touch of cruelty in the mouth.

Cruelty! Had he been cruel? It was the girl’s fault, not his. He had dreamed of her as a great artist, had given his love to her because he had thought her great. Then she had disappointed him. She had been shallow and unworthy. And, yet, a feeling of infinite regret came over him, as he thought of her lying at his feet sobbing like a little child. He remembered with what callousness he had watched her. Why had he been made like that? Why had such a soul been given to him? But he had suffered also. During the three terrible hours that the play had lasted, he had lived centuries of pain, aeon upon aeon of torture. His life was well worth hers. She had marred him for a moment, if he had wounded her for an age. Besides, women were better suited to bear sorrow than men. They lived on their emotions. They only thought of their emotions. When they took lovers, it was merely to have some one with whom they could have scenes. Lord Henry had told him that, and Lord Henry knew what women were. Why should he trouble about Sibyl Vane? She was nothing to him now.

But the picture? What was he to say of that? It held the secret of his life, and told his story. It had taught him to love his own beauty. Would it teach him to loathe his own soul? Would he ever look at it again?

No; it was merely an illusion wrought on the troubled senses. The horrible night that he had passed had left phantoms behind it. Suddenly there had fallen upon his brain that tiny scarlet speck that makes men mad. The picture had not changed. It was folly to think so.

Yet it was watching him, with its beautiful marred face and its cruel smile. Its bright hair gleamed in the early sunlight. Its blue eyes met his own. A sense of infinite pity, not for himself, but for the painted image of himself, came over him. It had altered already, and would alter more. Its gold would wither into grey. Its red and white roses would die. For every sin that he committed, a stain would fleck and wreck its fairness. But he would not sin. The picture, changed or unchanged, would be to him the visible emblem of conscience. He would resist temptation. He would not see Lord Henry any more—would not, at any rate, listen to those subtle poisonous theories that in Basil Hallward’s garden had first stirred within him the passion for impossible things. He would go back to Sibyl Vane, make her amends, marry her, try to love her again. Yes, it was his duty to do so. She must have suffered more than he had. Poor child! He had been selfish and cruel to her. The fascination that she had exercised over him would return. They would be happy together. His life with her would be beautiful and pure.

He got up from his chair and drew a large screen right in front of the portrait, shuddering as he glanced at it. “How horrible!” he murmured to himself, and he walked across to the window and opened it. When he stepped out on to the grass, he drew a deep breath. The fresh morning air seemed to drive away all his sombre passions. He thought only of Sibyl. A faint echo of his love came back to him. He repeated her name over and over again. The birds that were singing in the dew-drenched garden seemed to be telling the flowers about her.
It was long past noon when he awoke. His valet had crept several times on tiptoe into the room to see if he was stirring, and had wondered what made his young master sleep so late. Finally his bell sounded, and Victor came in softly with a cup of tea, and a pile of letters, on a small tray of old Sevres china, and drew back the olive-satin curtains, with their shimmering blue lining, that hung in front of the three tall windows.

“Monsieur has well slept this morning,” he said, smiling.

“What o’clock is it, Victor?” asked Dorian Gray drowsily.

“One hour and a quarter, Monsieur.”

How late it was! He sat up, and having sipped some tea, turned over his letters. One of them was from Lord Henry, and had been brought by hand that morning. He hesitated for a moment, and then put it aside. The others he opened listlessly. They contained the usual collection of cards, invitations to dinner, tickets for private views, programmes of charity concerts, and the like that are showered on fashionable young men every morning during the season. There was a rather heavy bill for a chased silver Louis-Quinze toilet-set that he had not yet had the courage to send on to his guardians, who were extremely old-fashioned people and did not realize that we live in an age when unnecessary things are our only necessities; and there were several very courteously worded communications from Jermyn Street money-lenders offering to advance any sum of money at a moment’s notice and at the most reasonable rates of interest.

After about ten minutes he got up, and throwing on an elaborate dressing-gown of silk-embroidered cashmere wool, passed into the onyx-paved bathroom. The cool water refreshed him after his long sleep. He seemed to have forgotten all that he had gone through. A dim sense of having taken part in some strange tragedy came to him once or twice, but there was the unreality of a dream about it.

As soon as he was dressed, he went into the library and sat down to a light French breakfast that had been laid out for him on a small round table close to the open window. It was an exquisite day. The warm air seemed laden with spices. A bee flew in and buzzed round the blue-dragon bowl that, filled with sulphur-yellow roses, stood before him. He felt perfectly happy.

Suddenly his eye fell on the screen that he had placed in front of the portrait, and he started.

“Too cold for Monsieur?” asked his valet, putting an omelette on the table. “I shut the window?”

Dorian shook his head. “I am not cold,” he murmured.

Was it all true? Had the portrait really changed? Or had it been simply his own imagination that had made him see a look of evil where there had been a look of joy? Surely a painted canvas could not alter? The thing was absurd. It would serve as a tale to tell Basil some day. It would make him smile.

And, yet, how vivid was his recollection of the whole thing! First in the dim twilight, and then in the bright dawn, he had seen the touch of cruelty round the warped lips. He almost dreaded his valet leaving the room. He knew that when he was alone he would have to examine the portrait. He was afraid of certainty. When the coffee and cigarettes had been brought and the man turned to go, he felt a wild desire to tell him to remain. As the door was closing behind him, he called him back. The man stood waiting for his orders. Dorian looked at him for a moment. “I am not at home to any one, Victor,” he said with a sigh. The man bowed and retired.

Then he rose from the table, lit a cigarette, and flung himself down on a luxuriously cushioned couch that stood facing the screen. The screen was an old one, of gilt Spanish leather, stamped and wrought with a rather florid Louis-Quatorze pattern. He scanned it curiously, wondering if ever before it had concealed the secret of a man’s life.

Should he move it aside, after all? Why not let it stay there? What was the use of knowing? If the thing was true, it was terrible. If it was not true, why trouble about it? But what if, by some fate or deadlier chance, eyes other than his spied behind and saw the horrible change? What should he do if Basil Hallward came and asked to look at his own picture? Basil would be sure to do that. No; the thing had to be examined, and at once. Anything would be better than this dreadful state of doubt.

He got up and locked both doors. At least he would be alone when he looked upon the mask of his shame. Then he drew the screen aside and saw himself face to face. It was perfectly true. The portrait had altered.

As he often remembered afterwards, and always with no small wonder, he found himself at first gazing at the portrait with a feeling of almost scientific interest. That such a change should have taken place was incredible to him. And yet it was a fact. Was there some subtle affinity between the chemical atoms that shaped themselves into form and colour on the canvas and the soul that was within him? Could it be that what that soul thought, they realized?—that what it dreamed, they made true? Or was there some other, more terrible reason? He shuddered, and felt afraid, and, going back to the couch, lay there, gazing at the picture in sickened horror.

One thing, however, he felt that it had done for him. It had made him conscious how unjust, how cruel, he had been to Sibyl Vane. It was not too late to make reparation for that. She could still be his wife. His unreal and selfish love would yield to some higher influence, would be transformed into some nobler passion, and the portrait that Basil Hallward had painted of him would be a guide to him through life, would be to him what holiness is to some, and conscience to others, and the fear of God to us all. There were opiates for remorse, drugs that could lull the moral sense to sleep. But here was a visible symbol of the degradation of sin. Here was an ever-present sign of the ruin men brought upon their souls.

Three o’clock struck, and four, and the half-hour rang its double chime, but Dorian Gray did not stir. He was trying to gather up the scarlet threads of life and to weave them into a pattern; to find his way through the sanguine labyrinth of passion through which he was wandering. He did not know what to do, or what to think. Finally, he went over to the table and wrote a passionate letter to the girl he had loved, imploring her forgiveness and accusing himself of madness. He covered page after page with wild words of sorrow and wilder words of pain. There is a luxury in self-reproach. When we blame ourselves, we feel that no one else has a right to blame us. It is the confession, not the priest, that gives us absolution. When Dorian had finished the letter, he felt that he had been forgiven.

Suddenly there came a knock to the door, and he heard Lord Henry’s voice outside. “My dear boy, I must see you. Let me in at once. I can’t bear your shutting yourself up like this.”

He made no answer at first, but remained quite still. The knocking still continued and grew louder. Yes, it was better to let Lord Henry in, and to explain to him the new life he was going to lead, to quarrel with him if it became necessary to quarrel, to part if parting was inevitable. He jumped up, drew the screen hastily across the picture, and unlocked the door.

“I am so sorry for it all, Dorian,” said Lord Henry as he entered. “But you must not think too much about it.”

“Do you mean about Sibyl Vane?” asked the lad.

“Yes, of course,” answered Lord Henry, sinking into a chair and slowly pulling off his yellow gloves. “It is dreadful, from one point of view, but it was not your fault. Tell me, did you go behind and see her, after the play was over?”

“Yes.”

“I felt sure you had. Did you make a scene with her?”

“I was brutal, Harry—perfectly brutal. But it is all right now. I am not sorry for anything that has happened. It has taught me to know myself better.”

“Ah, Dorian, I am so glad you take it in that way! I was afraid I would find you plunged in remorse and tearing that nice curly hair of yours.”

“I have got through all that,” said Dorian, shaking his head and smiling. “I am perfectly happy now. I know what conscience is, to begin with. It is not what you told me it was. It is the divinest thing in us. Don’t sneer at it, Harry, any more—at least not before me. I want to be good. I can’t bear the idea of my soul being hideous.”

“A very charming artistic basis for ethics, Dorian! I congratulate you on it. But how are you going to begin?”

“By marrying Sibyl Vane.”

“Marrying Sibyl Vane!” cried Lord Henry, standing up and looking at him in perplexed amazement. “But, my dear Dorian—”

“Yes, Harry, I know what you are going to say. Something dreadful about marriage. Don’t say it. Don’t ever say things of that kind to me again. Two days ago I asked Sibyl to marry me. I am not going to break my word to her. She is to be my wife.”

“Your wife! Dorian! ... Didn’t you get my letter? I wrote to you this morning, and sent the note down by my own man.”

“Your letter? Oh, yes, I remember. I have not read it yet, Harry. I was afraid there might be something in it that I wouldn’t like. You cut life to pieces with your epigrams.”

“You know nothing then?”

“What do you mean?”

Lord Henry walked across the room, and sitting down by Dorian Gray, took both his hands in his own and held them tightly. “Dorian,” he said, “my letter—don’t be frightened—was to tell you that Sibyl Vane is dead.”

A cry of pain broke from the lad’s lips, and he leaped to his feet, tearing his hands away from Lord Henry’s grasp. “Dead! Sibyl dead! It is not true! It is a horrible lie! How dare you say it?”

“It is quite true, Dorian,” said Lord Henry, gravely. “It is in all the morning papers. I wrote down to you to ask you not to see any one till I came. There will have to be an inquest, of course, and you must not be mixed up in it. Things like that make a man fashionable in Paris. But in London people are so prejudiced. Here, one should never make one’s début with a scandal. One should reserve that to give an interest to one’s old age. I suppose they don’t know your name at the theatre? If they don’t, it is all right. Did any one see you going round to her room? That is an important point.”

Dorian did not answer for a few moments. He was dazed with horror. Finally he stammered, in a stifled voice, “Harry, did you say an inquest? What did you mean by that? Did Sibyl—? Oh, Harry, I can’t bear it! But be quick. Tell me everything at once.”

“I have no doubt it was not an accident, Dorian, though it must be put in that way to the public. It seems that as she was leaving the theatre with her mother, about half-past twelve or so, she said she had forgotten something upstairs. They waited some time for her, but she did not come down again. They ultimately found her lying dead on the floor of her dressing-room. She had swallowed something by mistake, some dreadful thing they use at theatres. I don’t know what it was, but it had either prussic acid or white lead in it. I should fancy it was prussic acid, as she seems to have died instantaneously.”

“Harry, Harry, it is terrible!” cried the lad.

“Yes; it is very tragic, of course, but you must not get yourself mixed up in it. I see by The Standard that she was seventeen. I should have thought she was almost younger than that. She looked such a child, and seemed to know so little about acting. Dorian, you mustn’t let this thing get on your nerves. You must come and dine with me, and afterwards we will look in at the opera. It is a Patti night, and everybody will be there. You can come to my sister’s box. She has got some smart women with her.”

“So I have murdered Sibyl Vane,” said Dorian Gray, half to himself, “murdered her as surely as if I had cut her little throat with a knife. Yet the roses are not less lovely for all that. The birds sing just as happily in my garden. And to-night I am to dine with you, and then go on to the opera, and sup somewhere, I suppose, afterwards. How extraordinarily dramatic life is! If I had read all this in a book, Harry, I think I would have wept over it. Somehow, now that it has happened actually, and to me, it seems far too wonderful for tears. Here is the first passionate love-letter I have ever written in my life. Strange, that my first passionate love-letter should have been addressed to a dead girl. Can they feel, I wonder, those white silent people we call the dead? Sibyl! Can she feel, or know, or listen? Oh, Harry, how I loved her once! It seems years ago to me now. She was everything to me. Then came that dreadful night—was it really only last night?—when she played so badly, and my heart almost broke. She explained it all to me. It was terribly pathetic. But I was not moved a bit. I thought her shallow. Suddenly something happened that made me afraid. I can’t tell you what it was, but it was terrible. I said I would go back to her. I felt I had done wrong. And now she is dead. My God! My God! Harry, what shall I do? You don’t know the danger I am in, and there is nothing to keep me straight. She would have done that for me. She had no right to kill herself. It was selfish of her.”

“My dear Dorian,” answered Lord Henry, taking a cigarette from his case and producing a gold-latten matchbox, “the only way a woman can ever reform a man is by boring him so completely that he loses all possible interest in life. If you had married this girl, you would have been wretched. Of course, you would have treated her kindly. One can always be kind to people about whom one cares nothing. But she would have soon found out that you were absolutely indifferent to her. And when a woman finds that out about her husband, she either becomes dreadfully dowdy, or wears very smart bonnets that some other woman’s husband has to pay for. I say nothing about the social mistake, which would have been abject—which, of course, I would not have allowed—but I assure you that in any case the whole thing would have been an absolute failure.”

“I suppose it would,” muttered the lad, walking up and down the room and looking horribly pale. “But I thought it was my duty. It is not my fault that this terrible tragedy has prevented my doing what was right. I remember your saying once that there is a fatality about good resolutions—that they are always made too late. Mine certainly were.”

“Good resolutions are useless attempts to interfere with scientific laws. Their origin is pure vanity. Their result is absolutely nil. They give us, now and then, some of those luxurious sterile emotions that have a certain charm for the weak. That is all that can be said for them. They are simply cheques that men draw on a bank where they have no account.”

“Harry,” cried Dorian Gray, coming over and sitting down beside him, “why is it that I cannot feel this tragedy as much as I want to? I don’t think I am heartless. Do you?”

“You have done too many foolish things during the last fortnight to be entitled to give yourself that name, Dorian,” answered Lord Henry with his sweet melancholy smile.

The lad frowned. “I don’t like that explanation, Harry,” he rejoined, “but I am glad you don’t think I am heartless. I am nothing of the kind. I know I am not. And yet I must admit that this thing that has happened does not affect me as it should. It seems to me to be simply like a wonderful ending to a wonderful play. It has all the terrible beauty of a Greek tragedy, a tragedy in which I took a great part, but by which I have not been wounded.”

“It is an interesting question,” said Lord Henry, who found an exquisite pleasure in playing on the lad’s unconscious egotism, “an extremely interesting question. I fancy that the true explanation is this: It often happens that the real tragedies of life occur in such an inartistic manner that they hurt us by their crude violence, their absolute incoherence, their absurd want of meaning, their entire lack of style. They affect us just as vulgarity affects us. They give us an impression of sheer brute force, and we revolt against that. Sometimes, however, a tragedy that possesses artistic elements of beauty crosses our lives. If these elements of beauty are real, the whole thing simply appeals to our sense of dramatic effect. Suddenly we find that we are no longer the actors, but the spectators of the play. Or rather we are both. We watch ourselves, and the mere wonder of the spectacle enthralls us. In the present case, what is it that has really happened? Some one has killed herself for love of you. I wish that I had ever had such an experience. It would have made me in love with love for the rest of my life. The people who have adored me—there have not been very many, but there have been some—have always insisted on living on, long after I had ceased to care for them, or they to care for me. They have become stout and tedious, and when I meet them, they go in at once for reminiscences. That awful memory of woman! What a fearful thing it is! And what an utter intellectual stagnation it reveals! One should absorb the colour of life, but one should never remember its details. Details are always vulgar.”

“I must sow poppies in my garden,” sighed Dorian.

“There is no necessity,” rejoined his companion. “Life has always poppies in her hands. Of course, now and then things linger. I once wore nothing but violets all through one season, as a form of artistic mourning for a romance that would not die. Ultimately, however, it did die. I forget what killed it. I think it was her proposing to sacrifice the whole world for me. That is always a dreadful moment. It fills one with the terror of eternity. Well—would you believe it?—a week ago, at Lady Hampshire’s, I found myself seated at dinner next the lady in question, and she insisted on going over the whole thing again, and digging up the past, and raking up the future. I had buried my romance in a bed of asphodel. She dragged it out again and assured me that I had spoiled her life. I am bound to state that she ate an enormous dinner, so I did not feel any anxiety. But what a lack of taste she showed! The one charm of the past is that it is the past. But women never know when the curtain has fallen. They always want a sixth act, and as soon as the interest of the play is entirely over, they propose to continue it. If they were allowed their own way, every comedy would have a tragic ending, and every tragedy would culminate in a farce. They are charmingly artificial, but they have no sense of art. You are more fortunate than I am. I assure you, Dorian, that not one of the women I have known would have done for me what Sibyl Vane did for you. Ordinary women always console themselves. Some of them do it by going in for sentimental colours. Never trust a woman who wears mauve, whatever her age may be, or a woman over thirty-five who is fond of pink ribbons. It always means that they have a history. Others find a great consolation in suddenly discovering the good qualities of their husbands. They flaunt their conjugal felicity in one’s face, as if it were the most fascinating of sins. Religion consoles some. Its mysteries have all the charm of a flirtation, a woman once told me, and I can quite understand it. Besides, nothing makes one so vain as being told that one is a sinner. Conscience makes egotists of us all. Yes; there is really no end to the consolations that women find in modern life. Indeed, I have not mentioned the most important one.”

“What is that, Harry?” said the lad listlessly.

“Oh, the obvious consolation. Taking some one else’s admirer when one loses one’s own. In good society that always whitewashes a woman. But really, Dorian, how different Sibyl Vane must have been from all the women one meets! There is something to me quite beautiful about her death. I am glad I am living in a century when such wonders happen. They make one believe in the reality of the things we all play with, such as romance, passion, and love.”

“I was terribly cruel to her. You forget that.”

“I am afraid that women appreciate cruelty, downright cruelty, more than anything else. They have wonderfully primitive instincts. We have emancipated them, but they remain slaves looking for their masters, all the same. They love being dominated. I am sure you were splendid. I have never seen you really and absolutely angry, but I can fancy how delightful you looked. And, after all, you said something to me the day before yesterday that seemed to me at the time to be merely fanciful, but that I see now was absolutely true, and it holds the key to everything.”

“What was that, Harry?”

“You said to me that Sibyl Vane represented to you all the heroines of romance—that she was Desdemona one night, and Ophelia the other; that if she died as Juliet, she came to life as Imogen.”

“She will never come to life again now,” muttered the lad, burying his face in his hands.

“No, she will never come to life. She has played her last part. But you must think of that lonely death in the tawdry dressing-room simply as a strange lurid fragment from some Jacobean tragedy, as a wonderful scene from Webster, or Ford, or Cyril Tourneur. The girl never really lived, and so she has never really died. To you at least she was always a dream, a phantom that flitted through Shakespeare’s plays and left them lovelier for its presence, a reed through which Shakespeare’s music sounded richer and more full of joy. The moment she touched actual life, she marred it, and it marred her, and so she passed away. Mourn for Ophelia, if you like. Put ashes on your head because Cordelia was strangled. Cry out against Heaven because the daughter of Brabantio died. But don’t waste your tears over Sibyl Vane. She was less real than they are.”

There was a silence. The evening darkened in the room. Noiselessly, and with silver feet, the shadows crept in from the garden. The colours faded wearily out of things.

After some time Dorian Gray looked up. “You have explained me to myself, Harry,” he murmured with something of a sigh of relief. “I felt all that you have said, but somehow I was afraid of it, and I could not express it to myself. How well you know me! But we will not talk again of what has happened. It has been a marvellous experience. That is all. I wonder if life has still in store for me anything as marvellous.”

“Life has everything in store for you, Dorian. There is nothing that you, with your extraordinary good looks, will not be able to do.”

“But suppose, Harry, I became haggard, and old, and wrinkled? What then?”

“Ah, then,” said Lord Henry, rising to go, “then, my dear Dorian, you would have to fight for your victories. As it is, they are brought to you. No, you must keep your good looks. We live in an age that reads too much to be wise, and that thinks too much to be beautiful. We cannot spare you. And now you had better dress and drive down to the club. We are rather late, as it is.”

“I think I shall join you at the opera, Harry. I feel too tired to eat anything. What is the number of your sister’s box?”

“Twenty-seven, I believe. It is on the grand tier. You will see her name on the door. But I am sorry you won’t come and dine.”

“I don’t feel up to it,” said Dorian listlessly. “But I am awfully obliged to you for all that you have said to me. You are certainly my best friend. No one has ever understood me as you have.”

“We are only at the beginning of our friendship, Dorian,” answered Lord Henry, shaking him by the hand. “Good-bye. I shall see you before nine-thirty, I hope. Remember, Patti is singing.”

As he closed the door behind him, Dorian Gray touched the bell, and in a few minutes Victor appeared with the lamps and drew the blinds down. He waited impatiently for him to go. The man seemed to take an interminable time over everything.

As soon as he had left, he rushed to the screen and drew it back. No; there was no further change in the picture. It had received the news of Sibyl Vane’s death before he had known of it himself. It was conscious of the events of life as they occurred. The vicious cruelty that marred the fine lines of the mouth had, no doubt, appeared at the very moment that the girl had drunk the poison, whatever it was. Or was it indifferent to results? Did it merely take cognizance of what passed within the soul? He wondered, and hoped that some day he would see the change taking place before his very eyes, shuddering as he hoped it.

Poor Sibyl! What a romance it had all been! She had often mimicked death on the stage. Then Death himself had touched her and taken her with him. How had she played that dreadful last scene? Had she cursed him, as she died? No; she had died for love of him, and love would always be a sacrament to him now. She had atoned for everything by the sacrifice she had made of her life. He would not think any more of what she had made him go through, on that horrible night at the theatre. When he thought of her, it would be as a wonderful tragic figure sent on to the world’s stage to show the supreme reality of love. A wonderful tragic figure? Tears came to his eyes as he remembered her childlike look, and winsome fanciful ways, and shy tremulous grace. He brushed them away hastily and looked again at the picture.

He felt that the time had really come for making his choice. Or had his choice already been made? Yes, life had decided that for him—life, and his own infinite curiosity about life. Eternal youth, infinite passion, pleasures subtle and secret, wild joys and wilder sins—he was to have all these things. The portrait was to bear the burden of his shame: that was all.

A feeling of pain crept over him as he thought of the desecration that was in store for the fair face on the canvas. Once, in boyish mockery of Narcissus, he had kissed, or feigned to kiss, those painted lips that now smiled so cruelly at him. Morning after morning he had sat before the portrait wondering at its beauty, almost enamoured of it, as it seemed to him at times. Was it to alter now with every mood to which he yielded? Was it to become a monstrous and loathsome thing, to be hidden away in a locked room, to be shut out from the sunlight that had so often touched to brighter gold the waving wonder of its hair? The pity of it! the pity of it!

For a moment, he thought of praying that the horrible sympathy that existed between him and the picture might cease. It had changed in answer to a prayer; perhaps in answer to a prayer it might remain unchanged. And yet, who, that knew anything about life, would surrender the chance of remaining always young, however fantastic that chance might be, or with what fateful consequences it might be fraught? Besides, was it really under his control? Had it indeed been prayer that had produced the substitution? Might there not be some curious scientific reason for it all? If thought could exercise its influence upon a living organism, might not thought exercise an influence upon dead and inorganic things? Nay, without thought or conscious desire, might not things external to ourselves vibrate in unison with our moods and passions, atom calling to atom in secret love or strange affinity? But the reason was of no importance. He would never again tempt by a prayer any terrible power. If the picture was to alter, it was to alter. That was all. Why inquire too closely into it?

For there would be a real pleasure in watching it. He would be able to follow his mind into its secret places. This portrait would be to him the most magical of mirrors. As it had revealed to him his own body, so it would reveal to him his own soul. And when winter came upon it, he would still be standing where spring trembles on the verge of summer. When the blood crept from its face, and left behind a pallid mask of chalk with leaden eyes, he would keep the glamour of boyhood. Not one blossom of his loveliness would ever fade. Not one pulse of his life would ever weaken. Like the gods of the Greeks, he would be strong, and fleet, and joyous. What did it matter what happened to the coloured image on the canvas? He would be safe. That was everything.

He drew the screen back into its former place in front of the picture, smiling as he did so, and passed into his bedroom, where his valet was already waiting for him. An hour later he was at the opera, and Lord Henry was leaning over his chair.

As he was sitting at breakfast next morning, Basil Hallward was shown into the room.

“I am so glad I have found you, Dorian,” he said gravely. “I called last night, and they told me you were at the opera. Of course, I knew that was impossible. But I wish you had left word where you had really gone to. I passed a dreadful evening, half afraid that one tragedy might be followed by another. I think you might have telegraphed for me when you heard of it first. I read of it quite by chance in a late edition of The Globe that I picked up at the club. I came here at once and was miserable at not finding you. I can’t tell you how heart-broken I am about the whole thing. I know what you must suffer. But where were you? Did you go down and see the girl’s mother? For a moment I thought of following you there. They gave the address in the paper. Somewhere in the Euston Road, isn’t it? But I was afraid of intruding upon a sorrow that I could not lighten. Poor woman! What a state she must be in! And her only child, too! What did she say about it all?”

“My dear Basil, how do I know?” murmured Dorian Gray, sipping some pale-yellow wine from a delicate, gold-beaded bubble of Venetian glass and looking dreadfully bored. “I was at the opera. You should have come on there. I met Lady Gwendolen, Harry’s sister, for the first time. We were in her box. She is perfectly charming; and Patti sang divinely. Don’t talk about horrid subjects. If one doesn’t talk about a thing, it has never happened. It is simply expression, as Harry says, that gives reality to things. I may mention that she was not the woman’s only child. There is a son, a charming fellow, I believe. But he is not on the stage. He is a sailor, or something. And now, tell me about yourself and what you are painting.”

“You went to the opera?” said Hallward, speaking very slowly and with a strained touch of pain in his voice. “You went to the opera while Sibyl Vane was lying dead in some sordid lodging? You can talk to me of other women being charming, and of Patti singing divinely, before the girl you loved has even the quiet of a grave to sleep in? Why, man, there are horrors in store for that little white body of hers!”

“Stop, Basil! I won’t hear it!” cried Dorian, leaping to his feet. “You must not tell me about things. What is done is done. What is past is past.”

“You call yesterday the past?”

“What has the actual lapse of time got to do with it? It is only shallow people who require years to get rid of an emotion. A man who is master of himself can end a sorrow as easily as he can invent a pleasure. I don’t want to be at the mercy of my emotions. I want to use them, to enjoy them, and to dominate them.”

“Dorian, this is horrible! Something has changed you completely. You look exactly the same wonderful boy who, day after day, used to come down to my studio to sit for his picture. But you were simple, natural, and affectionate then. You were the most unspoiled creature in the whole world. Now, I don’t know what has come over you. You talk as if you had no heart, no pity in you. It is all Harry’s influence. I see that.”

The lad flushed up and, going to the window, looked out for a few moments on the green, flickering, sun-lashed garden. “I owe a great deal to Harry, Basil,” he said at last, “more than I owe to you. You only taught me to be vain.”

“Well, I am punished for that, Dorian—or shall be some day.”

“I don’t know what you mean, Basil,” he exclaimed, turning round. “I don’t know what you want. What do you want?”

“I want the Dorian Gray I used to paint,” said the artist sadly.

“Basil,” said the lad, going over to him and putting his hand on his shoulder, “you have come too late. Yesterday, when I heard that Sibyl Vane had killed herself—”

“Killed herself! Good heavens! is there no doubt about that?” cried Hallward, looking up at him with an expression of horror.

“My dear Basil! Surely you don’t think it was a vulgar accident? Of course she killed herself.”

The elder man buried his face in his hands. “How fearful,” he muttered, and a shudder ran through him.

“No,” said Dorian Gray, “there is nothing fearful about it. It is one of the great romantic tragedies of the age. As a rule, people who act lead the most commonplace lives. They are good husbands, or faithful wives, or something tedious. You know what I mean—middle-class virtue and all that kind of thing. How different Sibyl was! She lived her finest tragedy. She was always a heroine. The last night she played—the night you saw her—she acted badly because she had known the reality of love. When she knew its unreality, she died, as Juliet might have died. She passed again into the sphere of art. There is something of the martyr about her. Her death has all the pathetic uselessness of martyrdom, all its wasted beauty. But, as I was saying, you must not think I have not suffered. If you had come in yesterday at a particular moment—about half-past five, perhaps, or a quarter to six—you would have found me in tears. Even Harry, who was here, who brought me the news, in fact, had no idea what I was going through. I suffered immensely. Then it passed away. I cannot repeat an emotion. No one can, except sentimentalists. And you are awfully unjust, Basil. You come down here to console me. That is charming of you. You find me consoled, and you are furious. How like a sympathetic person! You remind me of a story Harry told me about a certain philanthropist who spent twenty years of his life in trying to get some grievance redressed, or some unjust law altered—I forget exactly what it was. Finally he succeeded, and nothing could exceed his disappointment. He had absolutely nothing to do, almost died of ennui, and became a confirmed misanthrope. And besides, my dear old Basil, if you really want to console me, teach me rather to forget what has happened, or to see it from a proper artistic point of view. Was it not Gautier who used to write about la consolation des arts? I remember picking up a little vellum-covered book in your studio one day and chancing on that delightful phrase. Well, I am not like that young man you told me of when we were down at Marlow together, the young man who used to say that yellow satin could console one for all the miseries of life. I love beautiful things that one can touch and handle. Old brocades, green bronzes, lacquer-work, carved ivories, exquisite surroundings, luxury, pomp—there is much to be got from all these. But the artistic temperament that they create, or at any rate reveal, is still more to me. To become the spectator of one’s own life, as Harry says, is to escape the suffering of life. I know you are surprised at my talking to you like this. You have not realized how I have developed. I was a schoolboy when you knew me. I am a man now. I have new passions, new thoughts, new ideas. I am different, but you must not like me less. I am changed, but you must always be my friend. Of course, I am very fond of Harry. But I know that you are better than he is. You are not stronger—you are too much afraid of life—but you are better. And how happy we used to be together! Don’t leave me, Basil, and don’t quarrel with me. I am what I am. There is nothing more to be said.”

The painter felt strangely moved. The lad was infinitely dear to him, and his personality had been the great turning point in his art. He could not bear the idea of reproaching him any more. After all, his indifference was probably merely a mood that would pass away. There was so much in him that was good, so much in him that was noble.

“Well, Dorian,” he said at length, with a sad smile, “I won’t speak to you again about this horrible thing, after to-day. I only trust your name won’t be mentioned in connection with it. The inquest is to take place this afternoon. Have they summoned you?”

Dorian shook his head, and a look of annoyance passed over his face at the mention of the word “inquest.” There was something so crude and vulgar about everything of the kind. “They don’t know my name,” he answered.

“But surely she did?”

“Only my Christian name, and that I am quite sure she never mentioned to any one. She told me once that they were all rather curious to learn who I was, and that she invariably told them my name was Prince Charming. It was pretty of her. You must do me a drawing of Sibyl, Basil. I should like to have something more of her than the memory of a few kisses and some broken pathetic words.”

“I will try and do something, Dorian, if it would please you. But you must come and sit to me yourself again. I can’t get on without you.”

“I can never sit to you again, Basil. It is impossible!” he exclaimed, starting back.

The painter stared at him. “My dear boy, what nonsense!” he cried. “Do you mean to say you don’t like what I did of you? Where is it? Why have you pulled the screen in front of it? Let me look at it. It is the best thing I have ever done. Do take the screen away, Dorian. It is simply disgraceful of your servant hiding my work like that. I felt the room looked different as I came in.”

“My servant has nothing to do with it, Basil. You don’t imagine I let him arrange my room for me? He settles my flowers for me sometimes—that is all. No; I did it myself. The light was too strong on the portrait.”

“Too strong! Surely not, my dear fellow? It is an admirable place for it. Let me see it.” And Hallward walked towards the corner of the room.

A cry of terror broke from Dorian Gray’s lips, and he rushed between the painter and the screen. “Basil,” he said, looking very pale, “you must not look at it. I don’t wish you to.”

“Not look at my own work! You are not serious. Why shouldn’t I look at it?” exclaimed Hallward, laughing.

“If you try to look at it, Basil, on my word of honour I will never speak to you again as long as I live. I am quite serious. I don’t offer any explanation, and you are not to ask for any. But, remember, if you touch this screen, everything is over between us.”

Hallward was thunderstruck. He looked at Dorian Gray in absolute amazement. He had never seen him like this before. The lad was actually pallid with rage. His hands were clenched, and the pupils of his eyes were like disks of blue fire. He was trembling all over.

“Dorian!”

“Don’t speak!”

“But what is the matter? Of course I won’t look at it if you don’t want me to,” he said, rather coldly, turning on his heel and going over towards the window. “But, really, it seems rather absurd that I shouldn’t see my own work, especially as I am going to exhibit it in Paris in the autumn. I shall probably have to give it another coat of varnish before that, so I must see it some day, and why not to-day?”

“To exhibit it! You want to exhibit it?” exclaimed Dorian Gray, a strange sense of terror creeping over him. Was the world going to be shown his secret? Were people to gape at the mystery of his life? That was impossible. Something—he did not know what—had to be done at once.

“Yes; I don’t suppose you will object to that. Georges Petit is going to collect all my best pictures for a special exhibition in the Rue de Sèze, which will open the first week in October. The portrait will only be away a month. I should think you could easily spare it for that time. In fact, you are sure to be out of town. And if you keep it always behind a screen, you can’t care much about it.”

Dorian Gray passed his hand over his forehead. There were beads of perspiration there. He felt that he was on the brink of a horrible danger. “You told me a month ago that you would never exhibit it,” he cried. “Why have you changed your mind? You people who go in for being consistent have just as many moods as others have. The only difference is that your moods are rather meaningless. You can’t have forgotten that you assured me most solemnly that nothing in the world would induce you to send it to any exhibition. You told Harry exactly the same thing.” He stopped suddenly, and a gleam of light came into his eyes. He remembered that Lord Henry had said to him once, half seriously and half in jest, “If you want to have a strange quarter of an hour, get Basil to tell you why he won’t exhibit your picture. He told me why he wouldn’t, and it was a revelation to me.” Yes, perhaps Basil, too, had his secret. He would ask him and try.

“Basil,” he said, coming over quite close and looking him straight in the face, “we have each of us a secret. Let me know yours, and I shall tell you mine. What was your reason for refusing to exhibit my picture?”

The painter shuddered in spite of himself. “Dorian, if I told you, you might like me less than you do, and you would certainly laugh at me. I could not bear your doing either of those two things. If you wish me never to look at your picture again, I am content. I have always you to look at. If you wish the best work I have ever done to be hidden from the world, I am satisfied. Your friendship is dearer to me than any fame or reputation.”

“No, Basil, you must tell me,” insisted Dorian Gray. “I think I have a right to know.” His feeling of terror had passed away, and curiosity had taken its place. He was determined to find out Basil Hallward’s mystery.

“Let us sit down, Dorian,” said the painter, looking troubled. “Let us sit down. And just answer me one question. Have you noticed in the picture something curious?—something that probably at first did not strike you, but that revealed itself to you suddenly?”

“Basil!” cried the lad, clutching the arms of his chair with trembling hands and gazing at him with wild startled eyes.

“I see you did. Don’t speak. Wait till you hear what I have to say. Dorian, from the moment I met you, your personality had the most extraordinary influence over me. I was dominated, soul, brain, and power, by you. You became to me the visible incarnation of that unseen ideal whose memory haunts us artists like an exquisite dream. I worshipped you. I grew jealous of every one to whom you spoke. I wanted to have you all to myself. I was only happy when I was with you. When you were away from me, you were still present in my art.... Of course, I never let you know anything about this. It would have been impossible. You would not have understood it. I hardly understood it myself. I only knew that I had seen perfection face to face, and that the world had become wonderful to my eyes—too wonderful, perhaps, for in such mad worships there is peril, the peril of losing them, no less than the peril of keeping them.... Weeks and weeks went on, and I grew more and more absorbed in you. Then came a new development. I had drawn you as Paris in dainty armour, and as Adonis with huntsman’s cloak and polished boar-spear. Crowned with heavy lotus-blossoms you had sat on the prow of Adrian’s barge, gazing across the green turbid Nile. You had leaned over the still pool of some Greek woodland and seen in the water’s silent silver the marvel of your own face. And it had all been what art should be—unconscious, ideal, and remote. One day, a fatal day I sometimes think, I determined to paint a wonderful portrait of you as you actually are, not in the costume of dead ages, but in your own dress and in your own time. Whether it was the realism of the method, or the mere wonder of your own personality, thus directly presented to me without mist or veil, I cannot tell. But I know that as I worked at it, every flake and film of colour seemed to me to reveal my secret. I grew afraid that others would know of my idolatry. I felt, Dorian, that I had told too much, that I had put too much of myself into it. Then it was that I resolved never to allow the picture to be exhibited. You were a little annoyed; but then you did not realize all that it meant to me. Harry, to whom I talked about it, laughed at me. But I did not mind that. When the picture was finished, and I sat alone with it, I felt that I was right.... Well, after a few days the thing left my studio, and as soon as I had got rid of the intolerable fascination of its presence, it seemed to me that I had been foolish in imagining that I had seen anything in it, more than that you were extremely good-looking and that I could paint. Even now I cannot help feeling that it is a mistake to think that the passion one feels in creation is ever really shown in the work one creates. Art is always more abstract than we fancy. Form and colour tell us of form and colour—that is all. It often seems to me that art conceals the artist far more completely than it ever reveals him. And so when I got this offer from Paris, I determined to make your portrait the principal thing in my exhibition. It never occurred to me that you would refuse. I see now that you were right. The picture cannot be shown. You must not be angry with me, Dorian, for what I have told you. As I said to Harry, once, you are made to be worshipped.”

Dorian Gray drew a long breath. The colour came back to his cheeks, and a smile played about his lips. The peril was over. He was safe for the time. Yet he could not help feeling infinite pity for the painter who had just made this strange confession to him, and wondered if he himself would ever be so dominated by the personality of a friend. Lord Henry had the charm of being very dangerous. But that was all. He was too clever and too cynical to be really fond of. Would there ever be some one who would fill him with a strange idolatry? Was that one of the things that life had in store?

“It is extraordinary to me, Dorian,” said Hallward, “that you should have seen this in the portrait. Did you really see it?”

“I saw something in it,” he answered, “something that seemed to me very curious.”

“Well, you don’t mind my looking at the thing now?”

Dorian shook his head. “You must not ask me that, Basil. I could not possibly let you stand in front of that picture.”

“You will some day, surely?”

“Never.”

“Well, perhaps you are right. And now good-bye, Dorian. You have been the one person in my life who has really influenced my art. Whatever I have done that is good, I owe to you. Ah! you don’t know what it cost me to tell you all that I have told you.”

“My dear Basil,” said Dorian, “what have you told me? Simply that you felt that you admired me too much. That is not even a compliment.”

“It was not intended as a compliment. It was a confession. Now that I have made it, something seems to have gone out of me. Perhaps one should never put one’s worship into words.”

“It was a very disappointing confession.”

“Why, what did you expect, Dorian? You didn’t see anything else in the picture, did you? There was nothing else to see?”

“No; there was nothing else to see. Why do you ask? But you mustn’t talk about worship. It is foolish. You and I are friends, Basil, and we must always remain so.”

“You have got Harry,” said the painter sadly.

“Oh, Harry!” cried the lad, with a ripple of laughter. “Harry spends his days in saying what is incredible and his evenings in doing what is improbable. Just the sort of life I would like to lead. But still I don’t think I would go to Harry if I were in trouble. I would sooner go to you, Basil.”

“You will sit to me again?”

“Impossible!”

“You spoil my life as an artist by refusing, Dorian. No man comes across two ideal things. Few come across one.”

“I can’t explain it to you, Basil, but I must never sit to you again. There is something fatal about a portrait. It has a life of its own. I will come and have tea with you. That will be just as pleasant.”

“Pleasanter for you, I am afraid,” murmured Hallward regretfully. “And now good-bye. I am sorry you won’t let me look at the picture once again. But that can’t be helped. I quite understand what you feel about it.”

As he left the room, Dorian Gray smiled to himself. Poor Basil! How little he knew of the true reason! And how strange it was that, instead of having been forced to reveal his own secret, he had succeeded, almost by chance, in wresting a secret from his friend! How much that strange confession explained to him! The painter’s absurd fits of jealousy, his wild devotion, his extravagant panegyrics, his curious reticences—he understood them all now, and he felt sorry. There seemed to him to be something tragic in a friendship so coloured by romance.

He sighed and touched the bell. The portrait must be hidden away at all costs. He could not run such a risk of discovery again. It had been mad of him to have allowed the thing to remain, even for an hour, in a room to which any of his friends had access.
When his servant entered, he looked at him steadfastly and wondered if he had thought of peering behind the screen. The man was quite impassive and waited for his orders. Dorian lit a cigarette and walked over to the glass and glanced into it. He could see the reflection of Victor’s face perfectly. It was like a placid mask of servility. There was nothing to be afraid of, there. Yet he thought it best to be on his guard.

Speaking very slowly, he told him to tell the house-keeper that he wanted to see her, and then to go to the frame-maker and ask him to send two of his men round at once. It seemed to him that as the man left the room his eyes wandered in the direction of the screen. Or was that merely his own fancy?

After a few moments, in her black silk dress, with old-fashioned thread mittens on her wrinkled hands, Mrs. Leaf bustled into the library. He asked her for the key of the schoolroom.

“The old schoolroom, Mr. Dorian?” she exclaimed. “Why, it is full of dust. I must get it arranged and put straight before you go into it. It is not fit for you to see, sir. It is not, indeed.”

“I don’t want it put straight, Leaf. I only want the key.”

“Well, sir, you’ll be covered with cobwebs if you go into it. Why, it hasn’t been opened for nearly five years—not since his lordship died.”

He winced at the mention of his grandfather. He had hateful memories of him. “That does not matter,” he answered. “I simply want to see the place—that is all. Give me the key.”

“And here is the key, sir,” said the old lady, going over the contents of her bunch with tremulously uncertain hands. “Here is the key. I’ll have it off the bunch in a moment. But you don’t think of living up there, sir, and you so comfortable here?”

“No, no,” he cried petulantly. “Thank you, Leaf. That will do.”

She lingered for a few moments, and was garrulous over some detail of the household. He sighed and told her to manage things as she thought best. She left the room, wreathed in smiles.

As the door closed, Dorian put the key in his pocket and looked round the room. His eye fell on a large, purple satin coverlet heavily embroidered with gold, a splendid piece of late seventeenth-century Venetian work that his grandfather had found in a convent near Bologna. Yes, that would serve to wrap the dreadful thing in. It had perhaps served often as a pall for the dead. Now it was to hide something that had a corruption of its own, worse than the corruption of death itself—something that would breed horrors and yet would never die. What the worm was to the corpse, his sins would be to the painted image on the canvas. They would mar its beauty and eat away its grace. They would defile it and make it shameful. And yet the thing would still live on. It would be always alive.

He shuddered, and for a moment he regretted that he had not told Basil the true reason why he had wished to hide the picture away. Basil would have helped him to resist Lord Henry’s influence, and the still more poisonous influences that came from his own temperament. The love that he bore him—for it was really love—had nothing in it that was not noble and intellectual. It was not that mere physical admiration of beauty that is born of the senses and that dies when the senses tire. It was such love as Michelangelo had known, and Montaigne, and Winckelmann, and Shakespeare himself. Yes, Basil could have saved him. But it was too late now. The past could always be annihilated. Regret, denial, or forgetfulness could do that. But the future was inevitable. There were passions in him that would find their terrible outlet, dreams that would make the shadow of their evil real.

He took up from the couch the great purple-and-gold texture that covered it, and, holding it in his hands, passed behind the screen. Was the face on the canvas viler than before? It seemed to him that it was unchanged, and yet his loathing of it was intensified. Gold hair, blue eyes, and rose-red lips—they all were there. It was simply the expression that had altered. That was horrible in its cruelty. Compared to what he saw in it of censure or rebuke, how shallow Basil’s reproaches about Sibyl Vane had been!—how shallow, and of what little account! His own soul was looking out at him from the canvas and calling him to judgement. A look of pain came across him, and he flung the rich pall over the picture. As he did so, a knock came to the door. He passed out as his servant entered.

“The persons are here, Monsieur.”

He felt that the man must be got rid of at once. He must not be allowed to know where the picture was being taken to. There was something sly about him, and he had thoughtful, treacherous eyes. Sitting down at the writing-table he scribbled a note to Lord Henry, asking him to send him round something to read and reminding him that they were to meet at eight-fifteen that evening.

“Wait for an answer,” he said, handing it to him, “and show the men in here.”

In two or three minutes there was another knock, and Mr. Hubbard himself, the celebrated frame-maker of South Audley Street, came in with a somewhat rough-looking young assistant. Mr. Hubbard was a florid, red-whiskered little man, whose admiration for art was considerably tempered by the inveterate impecuniosity of most of the artists who dealt with him. As a rule, he never left his shop. He waited for people to come to him. But he always made an exception in favour of Dorian Gray. There was something about Dorian that charmed everybody. It was a pleasure even to see him.

“What can I do for you, Mr. Gray?” he said, rubbing his fat freckled hands. “I thought I would do myself the honour of coming round in person. I have just got a beauty of a frame, sir. Picked it up at a sale. Old Florentine. Came from Fonthill, I believe. Admirably suited for a religious subject, Mr. Gray.”

“I am so sorry you have given yourself the trouble of coming round, Mr. Hubbard. I shall certainly drop in and look at the frame—though I don’t go in much at present for religious art—but to-day I only want a picture carried to the top of the house for me. It is rather heavy, so I thought I would ask you to lend me a couple of your men.”

“No trouble at all, Mr. Gray. I am delighted to be of any service to you. Which is the work of art, sir?”

“This,” replied Dorian, moving the screen back. “Can you move it, covering and all, just as it is? I don’t want it to get scratched going upstairs.”

“There will be no difficulty, sir,” said the genial frame-maker, beginning, with the aid of his assistant, to unhook the picture from the long brass chains by which it was suspended. “And, now, where shall we carry it to, Mr. Gray?”

“I will show you the way, Mr. Hubbard, if you will kindly follow me. Or perhaps you had better go in front. I am afraid it is right at the top of the house. We will go up by the front staircase, as it is wider.”

He held the door open for them, and they passed out into the hall and began the ascent. The elaborate character of the frame had made the picture extremely bulky, and now and then, in spite of the obsequious protests of Mr. Hubbard, who had the true tradesman’s spirited dislike of seeing a gentleman doing anything useful, Dorian put his hand to it so as to help them.

“Something of a load to carry, sir,” gasped the little man when they reached the top landing. And he wiped his shiny forehead.

“I am afraid it is rather heavy,” murmured Dorian as he unlocked the door that opened into the room that was to keep for him the curious secret of his life and hide his soul from the eyes of men.

He had not entered the place for more than four years—not, indeed, since he had used it first as a play-room when he was a child, and then as a study when he grew somewhat older. It was a large, well-proportioned room, which had been specially built by the last Lord Kelso for the use of the little grandson whom, for his strange likeness to his mother, and also for other reasons, he had always hated and desired to keep at a distance. It appeared to Dorian to have but little changed. There was the huge Italian cassone, with its fantastically painted panels and its tarnished gilt mouldings, in which he had so often hidden himself as a boy. There the satinwood book-case filled with his dog-eared schoolbooks. On the wall behind it was hanging the same ragged Flemish tapestry where a faded king and queen were playing chess in a garden, while a company of hawkers rode by, carrying hooded birds on their gauntleted wrists. How well he remembered it all! Every moment of his lonely childhood came back to him as he looked round. He recalled the stainless purity of his boyish life, and it seemed horrible to him that it was here the fatal portrait was to be hidden away. How little he had thought, in those dead days, of all that was in store for him!

But there was no other place in the house so secure from prying eyes as this. He had the key, and no one else could enter it. Beneath its purple pall, the face painted on the canvas could grow bestial, sodden, and unclean. What did it matter? No one could see it. He himself would not see it. Why should he watch the hideous corruption of his soul? He kept his youth—that was enough. And, besides, might not his nature grow finer, after all? There was no reason that the future should be so full of shame. Some love might come across his life, and purify him, and shield him from those sins that seemed to be already stirring in spirit and in flesh—those curious unpictured sins whose very mystery lent them their subtlety and their charm. Perhaps, some day, the cruel look would have passed away from the scarlet sensitive mouth, and he might show to the world Basil Hallward’s masterpiece.

No; that was impossible. Hour by hour, and week by week, the thing upon the canvas was growing old. It might escape the hideousness of sin, but the hideousness of age was in store for it. The cheeks would become hollow or flaccid. Yellow crow’s feet would creep round the fading eyes and make them horrible. The hair would lose its brightness, the mouth would gape or droop, would be foolish or gross, as the mouths of old men are. There would be the wrinkled throat, the cold, blue-veined hands, the twisted body, that he remembered in the grandfather who had been so stern to him in his boyhood. The picture had to be concealed. There was no help for it.

“Bring it in, Mr. Hubbard, please,” he said, wearily, turning round. “I am sorry I kept you so long. I was thinking of something else.”

“Always glad to have a rest, Mr. Gray,” answered the frame-maker, who was still gasping for breath. “Where shall we put it, sir?”

“Oh, anywhere. Here: this will do. I don’t want to have it hung up. Just lean it against the wall. Thanks.”

“Might one look at the work of art, sir?”

Dorian started. “It would not interest you, Mr. Hubbard,” he said, keeping his eye on the man. He felt ready to leap upon him and fling him to the ground if he dared to lift the gorgeous hanging that concealed the secret of his life. “I shan’t trouble you any more now. I am much obliged for your kindness in coming round.”

“Not at all, not at all, Mr. Gray. Ever ready to do anything for you, sir.” And Mr. Hubbard tramped downstairs, followed by the assistant, who glanced back at Dorian with a look of shy wonder in his rough uncomely face. He had never seen any one so marvellous.

When the sound of their footsteps had died away, Dorian locked the door and put the key in his pocket. He felt safe now. No one would ever look upon the horrible thing. No eye but his would ever see his shame.

On reaching the library, he found that it was just after five o’clock and that the tea had been already brought up. On a little table of dark perfumed wood thickly incrusted with nacre, a present from Lady Radley, his guardian’s wife, a pretty professional invalid who had spent the preceding winter in Cairo, was lying a note from Lord Henry, and beside it was a book bound in yellow paper, the cover slightly torn and the edges soiled. A copy of the third edition of The St. James’s Gazette had been placed on the tea-tray. It was evident that Victor had returned. He wondered if he had met the men in the hall as they were leaving the house and had wormed out of them what they had been doing. He would be sure to miss the picture—had no doubt missed it already, while he had been laying the tea-things. The screen had not been set back, and a blank space was visible on the wall. Perhaps some night he might find him creeping upstairs and trying to force the door of the room. It was a horrible thing to have a spy in one’s house. He had heard of rich men who had been blackmailed all their lives by some servant who had read a letter, or overheard a conversation, or picked up a card with an address, or found beneath a pillow a withered flower or a shred of crumpled lace.

He sighed, and having poured himself out some tea, opened Lord Henry’s note. It was simply to say that he sent him round the evening paper, and a book that might interest him, and that he would be at the club at eight-fifteen. He opened The St. James’s languidly, and looked through it. A red pencil-mark on the fifth page caught his eye. It drew attention to the following paragraph:

INQUEST ON AN ACTRESS.—An inquest was held this morning at the Bell Tavern, Hoxton Road, by Mr. Danby, the District Coroner, on the body of Sibyl Vane, a young actress recently engaged at the Royal Theatre, Holborn. A verdict of death by misadventure was returned. Considerable sympathy was expressed for the mother of the deceased, who was greatly affected during the giving of her own evidence, and that of Dr. Birrell, who had made the post-mortem examination of the deceased.

He frowned, and tearing the paper in two, went across the room and flung the pieces away. How ugly it all was! And how horribly real ugliness made things! He felt a little annoyed with Lord Henry for having sent him the report. And it was certainly stupid of him to have marked it with red pencil. Victor might have read it. The man knew more than enough English for that.

Perhaps he had read it and had begun to suspect something. And, yet, what did it matter? What had Dorian Gray to do with Sibyl Vane’s death? There was nothing to fear. Dorian Gray had not killed her.

His eye fell on the yellow book that Lord Henry had sent him. What was it, he wondered. He went towards the little, pearl-coloured octagonal stand that had always looked to him like the work of some strange Egyptian bees that wrought in silver, and taking up the volume, flung himself into an arm-chair and began to turn over the leaves. After a few minutes he became absorbed. It was the strangest book that he had ever read. It seemed to him that in exquisite raiment, and to the delicate sound of flutes, the sins of the world were passing in dumb show before him. Things that he had dimly dreamed of were suddenly made real to him. Things of which he had never dreamed were gradually revealed.

It was a novel without a plot and with only one character, being, indeed, simply a psychological study of a certain young Parisian who spent his life trying to realize in the nineteenth century all the passions and modes of thought that belonged to every century except his own, and to sum up, as it were, in himself the various moods through which the world-spirit had ever passed, loving for their mere artificiality those renunciations that men have unwisely called virtue, as much as those natural rebellions that wise men still call sin. The style in which it was written was that curious jewelled style, vivid and obscure at once, full of argot and of archaisms, of technical expressions and of elaborate paraphrases, that characterizes the work of some of the finest artists of the French school of Symbolistes. There were in it metaphors as monstrous as orchids and as subtle in colour. The life of the senses was described in the terms of mystical philosophy. One hardly knew at times whether one was reading the spiritual ecstasies of some mediæval saint or the morbid confessions of a modern sinner. It was a poisonous book. The heavy odour of incense seemed to cling about its pages and to trouble the brain. The mere cadence of the sentences, the subtle monotony of their music, so full as it was of complex refrains and movements elaborately repeated, produced in the mind of the lad, as he passed from chapter to chapter, a form of reverie, a malady of dreaming, that made him unconscious of the falling day and creeping shadows.

Cloudless, and pierced by one solitary star, a copper-green sky gleamed through the windows. He read on by its wan light till he could read no more. Then, after his valet had reminded him several times of the lateness of the hour, he got up, and going into the next room, placed the book on the little Florentine table that always stood at his bedside and began to dress for dinner.

It was almost nine o’clock before he reached the club, where he found Lord Henry sitting alone, in the morning-room, looking very much bored.

“I am so sorry, Harry,” he cried, “but really it is entirely your fault. That book you sent me so fascinated me that I forgot how the time was going.”

“Yes, I thought you would like it,” replied his host, rising from his chair.

“I didn’t say I liked it, Harry. I said it fascinated me. There is a great difference.”

“Ah, you have discovered that?” murmured Lord Henry. And they passed into the dining-room.
For years, Dorian Gray could not free himself from the influence of this book. Or perhaps it would be more accurate to say that he never sought to free himself from it. He procured from Paris no less than nine large-paper copies of the first edition, and had them bound in different colours, so that they might suit his various moods and the changing fancies of a nature over which he seemed, at times, to have almost entirely lost control. The hero, the wonderful young Parisian in whom the romantic and the scientific temperaments were so strangely blended, became to him a kind of prefiguring type of himself. And, indeed, the whole book seemed to him to contain the story of his own life, written before he had lived it.

In one point he was more fortunate than the novel’s fantastic hero. He never knew—never, indeed, had any cause to know—that somewhat grotesque dread of mirrors, and polished metal surfaces, and still water which came upon the young Parisian so early in his life, and was occasioned by the sudden decay of a beau that had once, apparently, been so remarkable. It was with an almost cruel joy—and perhaps in nearly every joy, as certainly in every pleasure, cruelty has its place—that he used to read the latter part of the book, with its really tragic, if somewhat overemphasized, account of the sorrow and despair of one who had himself lost what in others, and the world, he had most dearly valued.

For the wonderful beauty that had so fascinated Basil Hallward, and many others besides him, seemed never to leave him. Even those who had heard the most evil things against him—and from time to time strange rumours about his mode of life crept through London and became the chatter of the clubs—could not believe anything to his dishonour when they saw him. He had always the look of one who had kept himself unspotted from the world. Men who talked grossly became silent when Dorian Gray entered the room. There was something in the purity of his face that rebuked them. His mere presence seemed to recall to them the memory of the innocence that they had tarnished. They wondered how one so charming and graceful as he was could have escaped the stain of an age that was at once sordid and sensual.

Often, on returning home from one of those mysterious and prolonged absences that gave rise to such strange conjecture among those who were his friends, or thought that they were so, he himself would creep upstairs to the locked room, open the door with the key that never left him now, and stand, with a mirror, in front of the portrait that Basil Hallward had painted of him, looking now at the evil and aging face on the canvas, and now at the fair young face that laughed back at him from the polished glass. The very sharpness of the contrast used to quicken his sense of pleasure. He grew more and more enamoured of his own beauty, more and more interested in the corruption of his own soul. He would examine with minute care, and sometimes with a monstrous and terrible delight, the hideous lines that seared the wrinkling forehead or crawled around the heavy sensual mouth, wondering sometimes which were the more horrible, the signs of sin or the signs of age. He would place his white hands beside the coarse bloated hands of the picture, and smile. He mocked the misshapen body and the failing limbs.

There were moments, indeed, at night, when, lying sleepless in his own delicately scented chamber, or in the sordid room of the little ill-famed tavern near the docks which, under an assumed name and in disguise, it was his habit to frequent, he would think of the ruin he had brought upon his soul with a pity that was all the more poignant because it was purely selfish. But moments such as these were rare. That curiosity about life which Lord Henry had first stirred in him, as they sat together in the garden of their friend, seemed to increase with gratification. The more he knew, the more he desired to know. He had mad hungers that grew more ravenous as he fed them.

Yet he was not really reckless, at any rate in his relations to society. Once or twice every month during the winter, and on each Wednesday evening while the season lasted, he would throw open to the world his beautiful house and have the most celebrated musicians of the day to charm his guests with the wonders of their art. His little dinners, in the settling of which Lord Henry always assisted him, were noted as much for the careful selection and placing of those invited, as for the exquisite taste shown in the decoration of the table, with its subtle symphonic arrangements of exotic flowers, and embroidered cloths, and antique plate of gold and silver. Indeed, there were many, especially among the very young men, who saw, or fancied that they saw, in Dorian Gray the true realization of a type of which they had often dreamed in Eton or Oxford days, a type that was to combine something of the real culture of the scholar with all the grace and distinction and perfect manner of a citizen of the world. To them he seemed to be of the company of those whom Dante describes as having sought to “make themselves perfect by the worship of beauty.” Like Gautier, he was one for whom “the visible world existed.”

And, certainly, to him life itself was the first, the greatest, of the arts, and for it all the other arts seemed to be but a preparation. Fashion, by which what is really fantastic becomes for a moment universal, and dandyism, which, in its own way, is an attempt to assert the absolute modernity of beauty, had, of course, their fascination for him. His mode of dressing, and the particular styles that from time to time he affected, had their marked influence on the young exquisites of the Mayfair balls and Pall Mall club windows, who copied him in everything that he did, and tried to reproduce the accidental charm of his graceful, though to him only half-serious, fopperies.

For, while he was but too ready to accept the position that was almost immediately offered to him on his coming of age, and found, indeed, a subtle pleasure in the thought that he might really become to the London of his own day what to imperial Neronian Rome the author of the Satyricon once had been, yet in his inmost heart he desired to be something more than a mere arbiter elegantiarum, to be consulted on the wearing of a jewel, or the knotting of a necktie, or the conduct of a cane. He sought to elaborate some new scheme of life that would have its reasoned philosophy and its ordered principles, and find in the spiritualizing of the senses its highest realization.

The worship of the senses has often, and with much justice, been decried, men feeling a natural instinct of terror about passions and sensations that seem stronger than themselves, and that they are conscious of sharing with the less highly organized forms of existence. But it appeared to Dorian Gray that the true nature of the senses had never been understood, and that they had remained savage and animal merely because the world had sought to starve them into submission or to kill them by pain, instead of aiming at making them elements of a new spirituality, of which a fine instinct for beauty was to be the dominant characteristic. As he looked back upon man moving through history, he was haunted by a feeling of loss. So much had been surrendered! and to such little purpose! There had been mad wilful rejections, monstrous forms of self-torture and self-denial, whose origin was fear and whose result was a degradation infinitely more terrible than that fancied degradation from which, in their ignorance, they had sought to escape; Nature, in her wonderful irony, driving out the anchorite to feed with the wild animals of the desert and giving to the hermit the beasts of the field as his companions.

Yes: there was to be, as Lord Henry had prophesied, a new Hedonism that was to recreate life and to save it from that harsh uncomely puritanism that is having, in our own day, its curious revival. It was to have its service of the intellect, certainly, yet it was never to accept any theory or system that would involve the sacrifice of any mode of passionate experience. Its aim, indeed, was to be experience itself, and not the fruits of experience, sweet or bitter as they might be. Of the asceticism that deadens the senses, as of the vulgar profligacy that dulls them, it was to know nothing. But it was to teach man to concentrate himself upon the moments of a life that is itself but a moment.

There are few of us who have not sometimes wakened before dawn, either after one of those dreamless nights that make us almost enamoured of death, or one of those nights of horror and misshapen joy, when through the chambers of the brain sweep phantoms more terrible than reality itself, and instinct with that vivid life that lurks in all grotesques, and that lends to Gothic art its enduring vitality, this art being, one might fancy, especially the art of those whose minds have been troubled with the malady of reverie. Gradually white fingers creep through the curtains, and they appear to tremble. In black fantastic shapes, dumb shadows crawl into the corners of the room and crouch there. Outside, there is the stirring of birds among the leaves, or the sound of men going forth to their work, or the sigh and sob of the wind coming down from the hills and wandering round the silent house, as though it feared to wake the sleepers and yet must needs call forth sleep from her purple cave. Veil after veil of thin dusky gauze is lifted, and by degrees the forms and colours of things are restored to them, and we watch the dawn remaking the world in its antique pattern. The wan mirrors get back their mimic life. The flameless tapers stand where we had left them, and beside them lies the half-cut book that we had been studying, or the wired flower that we had worn at the ball, or the letter that we had been afraid to read, or that we had read too often. Nothing seems to us changed. Out of the unreal shadows of the night comes back the real life that we had known. We have to resume it where we had left off, and there steals over us a terrible sense of the necessity for the continuance of energy in the same wearisome round of stereotyped habits, or a wild longing, it may be, that our eyelids might open some morning upon a world that had been refashioned anew in the darkness for our pleasure, a world in which things would have fresh shapes and colours, and be changed, or have other secrets, a world in which the past would have little or no place, or survive, at any rate, in no conscious form of obligation or regret, the remembrance even of joy having its bitterness and the memories of pleasure their pain.

It was the creation of such worlds as these that seemed to Dorian Gray to be the true object, or amongst the true objects, of life; and in his search for sensations that would be at once new and delightful, and possess that element of strangeness that is so essential to romance, he would often adopt certain modes of thought that he knew to be really alien to his nature, abandon himself to their subtle influences, and then, having, as it were, caught their colour and satisfied his intellectual curiosity, leave them with that curious indifference that is not incompatible with a real ardour of temperament, and that, indeed, according to certain modern psychologists, is often a condition of it.

It was rumoured of him once that he was about to join the Roman Catholic communion, and certainly the Roman ritual had always a great attraction for him. The daily sacrifice, more awful really than all the sacrifices of the antique world, stirred him as much by its superb rejection of the evidence of the senses as by the primitive simplicity of its elements and the eternal pathos of the human tragedy that it sought to symbolize. He loved to kneel down on the cold marble pavement and watch the priest, in his stiff flowered dalmatic, slowly and with white hands moving aside the veil of the tabernacle, or raising aloft the jewelled, lantern-shaped monstrance with that pallid wafer that at times, one would fain think, is indeed the “panis cælestis,” the bread of angels, or, robed in the garments of the Passion of Christ, breaking the Host into the chalice and smiting his breast for his sins. The fuming censers that the grave boys, in their lace and scarlet, tossed into the air like great gilt flowers had their subtle fascination for him. As he passed out, he used to look with wonder at the black confessionals and long to sit in the dim shadow of one of them and listen to men and women whispering through the worn grating the true story of their lives.

But he never fell into the error of arresting his intellectual development by any formal acceptance of creed or system, or of mistaking, for a house in which to live, an inn that is but suitable for the sojourn of a night, or for a few hours of a night in which there are no stars and the moon is in travail. Mysticism, with its marvellous power of making common things strange to us, and the subtle antinomianism that always seems to accompany it, moved him for a season; and for a season he inclined to the materialistic doctrines of the Darwinismus movement in Germany, and found a curious pleasure in tracing the thoughts and passions of men to some pearly cell in the brain, or some white nerve in the body, delighting in the conception of the absolute dependence of the spirit on certain physical conditions, morbid or healthy, normal or diseased. Yet, as has been said of him before, no theory of life seemed to him to be of any importance compared with life itself. He felt keenly conscious of how barren all intellectual speculation is when separated from action and experiment. He knew that the senses, no less than the soul, have their spiritual mysteries to reveal.

And so he would now study perfumes and the secrets of their manufacture, distilling heavily scented oils and burning odorous gums from the East. He saw that there was no mood of the mind that had not its counterpart in the sensuous life, and set himself to discover their true relations, wondering what there was in frankincense that made one mystical, and in ambergris that stirred one’s passions, and in violets that woke the memory of dead romances, and in musk that troubled the brain, and in champak that stained the imagination; and seeking often to elaborate a real psychology of perfumes, and to estimate the several influences of sweet-smelling roots and scented, pollen-laden flowers; of aromatic balms and of dark and fragrant woods; of spikenard, that sickens; of hovenia, that makes men mad; and of aloes, that are said to be able to expel melancholy from the soul.

At another time he devoted himself entirely to music, and in a long latticed room, with a vermilion-and-gold ceiling and walls of olive-green lacquer, he used to give curious concerts in which mad gipsies tore wild music from little zithers, or grave, yellow-shawled Tunisians plucked at the strained strings of monstrous lutes, while grinning Negroes beat monotonously upon copper drums and, crouching upon scarlet mats, slim turbaned Indians blew through long pipes of reed or brass and charmed—or feigned to charm—great hooded snakes and horrible horned adders. The harsh intervals and shrill discords of barbaric music stirred him at times when Schubert’s grace, and Chopin’s beautiful sorrows, and the mighty harmonies of Beethoven himself, fell unheeded on his ear. He collected together from all parts of the world the strangest instruments that could be found, either in the tombs of dead nations or among the few savage tribes that have survived contact with Western civilizations, and loved to touch and try them. He had the mysterious juruparis of the Rio Negro Indians, that women are not allowed to look at and that even youths may not see till they have been subjected to fasting and scourging, and the earthen jars of the Peruvians that have the shrill cries of birds, and flutes of human bones such as Alfonso de Ovalle heard in Chile, and the sonorous green jaspers that are found near Cuzco and give forth a note of singular sweetness. He had painted gourds filled with pebbles that rattled when they were shaken; the long clarin of the Mexicans, into which the performer does not blow, but through which he inhales the air; the harsh ture of the Amazon tribes, that is sounded by the sentinels who sit all day long in high trees, and can be heard, it is said, at a distance of three leagues; the teponaztli, that has two vibrating tongues of wood and is beaten with sticks that are smeared with an elastic gum obtained from the milky juice of plants; the yotl-bells of the Aztecs, that are hung in clusters like grapes; and a huge cylindrical drum, covered with the skins of great serpents, like the one that Bernal Diaz saw when he went with Cortes into the Mexican temple, and of whose doleful sound he has left us so vivid a description. The fantastic character of these instruments fascinated him, and he felt a curious delight in the thought that art, like Nature, has her monsters, things of bestial shape and with hideous voices. Yet, after some time, he wearied of them, and would sit in his box at the opera, either alone or with Lord Henry, listening in rapt pleasure to “Tannhauser” and seeing in the prelude to that great work of art a presentation of the tragedy of his own soul.

On one occasion he took up the study of jewels, and appeared at a costume ball as Anne de Joyeuse, Admiral of France, in a dress covered with five hundred and sixty pearls. This taste enthralled him for years, and, indeed, may be said never to have left him. He would often spend a whole day settling and resettling in their cases the various stones that he had collected, such as the olive-green chrysoberyl that turns red by lamplight, the cymophane with its wirelike line of silver, the pistachio-coloured peridot, rose-pink and wine-yellow topazes, carbuncles of fiery scarlet with tremulous, four-rayed stars, flame-red cinnamon-stones, orange and violet spinels, and amethysts with their alternate layers of ruby and sapphire. He loved the red gold of the sunstone, and the moonstone’s pearly whiteness, and the broken rainbow of the milky opal. He procured from Amsterdam three emeralds of extraordinary size and richness of colour, and had a turquoise de la vieille roche that was the envy of all the connoisseurs.

He discovered wonderful stories, also, about jewels. In Alphonso’s Clericalis Disciplina a serpent was mentioned with eyes of real jacinth, and in the romantic history of Alexander, the Conqueror of Emathia was said to have found in the vale of Jordan snakes “with collars of real emeralds growing on their backs.” There was a gem in the brain of the dragon, Philostratus told us, and “by the exhibition of golden letters and a scarlet robe” the monster could be thrown into a magical sleep and slain. According to the great alchemist, Pierre de Boniface, the diamond rendered a man invisible, and the agate of India made him eloquent. The cornelian appeased anger, and the hyacinth provoked sleep, and the amethyst drove away the fumes of wine. The garnet cast out demons, and the hydropicus deprived the moon of her colour. The selenite waxed and waned with the moon, and the meloceus, that discovers thieves, could be affected only by the blood of kids. Leonardus Camillus had seen a white stone taken from the brain of a newly killed toad, that was a certain antidote against poison. The bezoar, that was found in the heart of the Arabian deer, was a charm that could cure the plague. In the nests of Arabian birds was the aspilates, that, according to Democritus, kept the wearer from any danger by fire.

The King of Ceilan rode through his city with a large ruby in his hand, as the ceremony of his coronation. The gates of the palace of John the Priest were “made of sardius, with the horn of the horned snake inwrought, so that no man might bring poison within.” Over the gable were “two golden apples, in which were two carbuncles,” so that the gold might shine by day and the carbuncles by night. In Lodge’s strange romance ‘A Margarite of America’, it was stated that in the chamber of the queen one could behold “all the chaste ladies of the world, inchased out of silver, looking through fair mirrours of chrysolites, carbuncles, sapphires, and greene emeraults.” Marco Polo had seen the inhabitants of Zipangu place rose-coloured pearls in the mouths of the dead. A sea-monster had been enamoured of the pearl that the diver brought to King Perozes, and had slain the thief, and mourned for seven moons over its loss. When the Huns lured the king into the great pit, he flung it away—Procopius tells the story—nor was it ever found again, though the Emperor Anastasius offered five hundred-weight of gold pieces for it. The King of Malabar had shown to a certain Venetian a rosary of three hundred and four pearls, one for every god that he worshipped.

When the Duke de Valentinois, son of Alexander VI., visited Louis XII. of France, his horse was loaded with gold leaves, according to Brantome, and his cap had double rows of rubies that threw out a great light. Charles of England had ridden in stirrups hung with four hundred and twenty-one diamonds. Richard II had a coat, valued at thirty thousand marks, which was covered with balas rubies. Hall described Henry VIII., on his way to the Tower previous to his coronation, as wearing “a jacket of raised gold, the placard embroidered with diamonds and other rich stones, and a great bauderike about his neck of large balasses.” The favourites of James I wore ear-rings of emeralds set in gold filigrane. Edward II gave to Piers Gaveston a suit of red-gold armour studded with jacinths, a collar of gold roses set with turquoise-stones, and a skull-cap parsemé with pearls. Henry II. wore jewelled gloves reaching to the elbow, and had a hawk-glove sewn with twelve rubies and fifty-two great orients. The ducal hat of Charles the Rash, the last Duke of Burgundy of his race, was hung with pear-shaped pearls and studded with sapphires.

How exquisite life had once been! How gorgeous in its pomp and decoration! Even to read of the luxury of the dead was wonderful.

Then he turned his attention to embroideries and to the tapestries that performed the office of frescoes in the chill rooms of the northern nations of Europe. As he investigated the subject—and he always had an extraordinary faculty of becoming absolutely absorbed for the moment in whatever he took up—he was almost saddened by the reflection of the ruin that time brought on beautiful and wonderful things. He, at any rate, had escaped that. Summer followed summer, and the yellow jonquils bloomed and died many times, and nights of horror repeated the story of their shame, but he was unchanged. No winter marred his face or stained his flowerlike bloom. How different it was with material things! Where had they passed to? Where was the great crocus-coloured robe, on which the gods fought against the giants, that had been worked by brown girls for the pleasure of Athena? Where the huge velarium that Nero had stretched across the Colosseum at Rome, that Titan sail of purple on which was represented the starry sky, and Apollo driving a chariot drawn by white, gilt-reined steeds? He longed to see the curious table-napkins wrought for the Priest of the Sun, on which were displayed all the dainties and viands that could be wanted for a feast; the mortuary cloth of King Chilperic, with its three hundred golden bees; the fantastic robes that excited the indignation of the Bishop of Pontus and were figured with “lions, panthers, bears, dogs, forests, rocks, hunters—all, in fact, that a painter can copy from nature”; and the coat that Charles of Orleans once wore, on the sleeves of which were embroidered the verses of a song beginning “Madame, je suis tout joyeux,” the musical accompaniment of the words being wrought in gold thread, and each note, of square shape in those days, formed with four pearls. He read of the room that was prepared at the palace at Rheims for the use of Queen Joan of Burgundy and was decorated with “thirteen hundred and twenty-one parrots, made in broidery, and blazoned with the king’s arms, and five hundred and sixty-one butterflies, whose wings were similarly ornamented with the arms of the queen, the whole worked in gold.” Catherine de Medicis had a mourning-bed made for her of black velvet powdered with crescents and suns. Its curtains were of damask, with leafy wreaths and garlands, figured upon a gold and silver ground, and fringed along the edges with broideries of pearls, and it stood in a room hung with rows of the queen’s devices in cut black velvet upon cloth of silver. Louis XIV. had gold embroidered caryatides fifteen feet high in his apartment. The state bed of Sobieski, King of Poland, was made of Smyrna gold brocade embroidered in turquoises with verses from the Koran. Its supports were of silver gilt, beautifully chased, and profusely set with enamelled and jewelled medallions. It had been taken from the Turkish camp before Vienna, and the standard of Mohammed had stood beneath the tremulous gilt of its canopy.

And so, for a whole year, he sought to accumulate the most exquisite specimens that he could find of textile and embroidered work, getting the dainty Delhi muslins, finely wrought with gold-thread palmates and stitched over with iridescent beetles’ wings; the Dacca gauzes, that from their transparency are known in the East as “woven air,” and “running water,” and “evening dew”; strange figured cloths from Java; elaborate yellow Chinese hangings; books bound in tawny satins or fair blue silks and wrought with fleurs-de-lis, birds and images; veils of lacis worked in Hungary point; Sicilian brocades and stiff Spanish velvets; Georgian work, with its gilt coins, and Japanese Foukousas, with their green-toned golds and their marvellously plumaged birds.

He had a special passion, also, for ecclesiastical vestments, as indeed he had for everything connected with the service of the Church. In the long cedar chests that lined the west gallery of his house, he had stored away many rare and beautiful specimens of what is really the raiment of the Bride of Christ, who must wear purple and jewels and fine linen that she may hide the pallid macerated body that is worn by the suffering that she seeks for and wounded by self-inflicted pain. He possessed a gorgeous cope of crimson silk and gold-thread damask, figured with a repeating pattern of golden pomegranates set in six-petalled formal blossoms, beyond which on either side was the pine-apple device wrought in seed-pearls. The orphreys were divided into panels representing scenes from the life of the Virgin, and the coronation of the Virgin was figured in coloured silks upon the hood. This was Italian work of the fifteenth century. Another cope was of green velvet, embroidered with heart-shaped groups of acanthus-leaves, from which spread long-stemmed white blossoms, the details of which were picked out with silver thread and coloured crystals. The morse bore a seraph’s head in gold-thread raised work. The orphreys were woven in a diaper of red and gold silk, and were starred with medallions of many saints and martyrs, among whom was St. Sebastian. He had chasubles, also, of amber-coloured silk, and blue silk and gold brocade, and yellow silk damask and cloth of gold, figured with representations of the Passion and Crucifixion of Christ, and embroidered with lions and peacocks and other emblems; dalmatics of white satin and pink silk damask, decorated with tulips and dolphins and fleurs-de-lis; altar frontals of crimson velvet and blue linen; and many corporals, chalice-veils, and sudaria. In the mystic offices to which such things were put, there was something that quickened his imagination.

For these treasures, and everything that he collected in his lovely house, were to be to him means of forgetfulness, modes by which he could escape, for a season, from the fear that seemed to him at times to be almost too great to be borne. Upon the walls of the lonely locked room where he had spent so much of his boyhood, he had hung with his own hands the terrible portrait whose changing features showed him the real degradation of his life, and in front of it had draped the purple-and-gold pall as a curtain. For weeks he would not go there, would forget the hideous painted thing, and get back his light heart, his wonderful joyousness, his passionate absorption in mere existence. Then, suddenly, some night he would creep out of the house, go down to dreadful places near Blue Gate Fields, and stay there, day after day, until he was driven away. On his return he would sit in front of the picture, sometimes loathing it and himself, but filled, at other times, with that pride of individualism that is half the fascination of sin, and smiling with secret pleasure at the misshapen shadow that had to bear the burden that should have been his own.

After a few years he could not endure to be long out of England, and gave up the villa that he had shared at Trouville with Lord Henry, as well as the little white walled-in house at Algiers where they had more than once spent the winter. He hated to be separated from the picture that was such a part of his life, and was also afraid that during his absence some one might gain access to the room, in spite of the elaborate bars that he had caused to be placed upon the door.

He was quite conscious that this would tell them nothing. It was true that the portrait still preserved, under all the foulness and ugliness of the face, its marked likeness to himself; but what could they learn from that? He would laugh at any one who tried to taunt him. He had not painted it. What was it to him how vile and full of shame it looked? Even if he told them, would they believe it?

Yet he was afraid. Sometimes when he was down at his great house in Nottinghamshire, entertaining the fashionable young men of his own rank who were his chief companions, and astounding the county by the wanton luxury and gorgeous splendour of his mode of life, he would suddenly leave his guests and rush back to town to see that the door had not been tampered with and that the picture was still there. What if it should be stolen? The mere thought made him cold with horror. Surely the world would know his secret then. Perhaps the world already suspected it.

For, while he fascinated many, there were not a few who distrusted him. He was very nearly blackballed at a West End club of which his birth and social position fully entitled him to become a member, and it was said that on one occasion, when he was brought by a friend into the smoking-room of the Churchill, the Duke of Berwick and another gentleman got up in a marked manner and went out. Curious stories became current about him after he had passed his twenty-fifth year. It was rumoured that he had been seen brawling with foreign sailors in a low den in the distant parts of Whitechapel, and that he consorted with thieves and coiners and knew the mysteries of their trade. His extraordinary absences became notorious, and, when he used to reappear again in society, men would whisper to each other in corners, or pass him with a sneer, or look at him with cold searching eyes, as though they were determined to discover his secret.

Of such insolences and attempted slights he, of course, took no notice, and in the opinion of most people his frank debonair manner, his charming boyish smile, and the infinite grace of that wonderful youth that seemed never to leave him, were in themselves a sufficient answer to the calumnies, for so they termed them, that were circulated about him. It was remarked, however, that some of those who had been most intimate with him appeared, after a time, to shun him. Women who had wildly adored him, and for his sake had braved all social censure and set convention at defiance, were seen to grow pallid with shame or horror if Dorian Gray entered the room.

Yet these whispered scandals only increased in the eyes of many his strange and dangerous charm. His great wealth was a certain element of security. Society—civilized society, at least—is never very ready to believe anything to the detriment of those who are both rich and fascinating. It feels instinctively that manners are of more importance than morals, and, in its opinion, the highest respectability is of much less value than the possession of a good chef. And, after all, it is a very poor consolation to be told that the man who has given one a bad dinner, or poor wine, is irreproachable in his private life. Even the cardinal virtues cannot atone for half-cold entrées, as Lord Henry remarked once, in a discussion on the subject, and there is possibly a good deal to be said for his view. For the canons of good society are, or should be, the same as the canons of art. Form is absolutely essential to it. It should have the dignity of a ceremony, as well as its unreality, and should combine the insincere character of a romantic play with the wit and beauty that make such plays delightful to us. Is insincerity such a terrible thing? I think not. It is merely a method by which we can multiply our personalities.

Such, at any rate, was Dorian Gray’s opinion. He used to wonder at the shallow psychology of those who conceive the ego in man as a thing simple, permanent, reliable, and of one essence. To him, man was a being with myriad lives and myriad sensations, a complex multiform creature that bore within itself strange legacies of thought and passion, and whose very flesh was tainted with the monstrous maladies of the dead. He loved to stroll through the gaunt cold picture-gallery of his country house and look at the various portraits of those whose blood flowed in his veins. Here was Philip Herbert, described by Francis Osborne, in his Memoires on the Reigns of Queen Elizabeth and King James, as one who was “caressed by the Court for his handsome face, which kept him not long company.” Was it young Herbert’s life that he sometimes led? Had some strange poisonous germ crept from body to body till it had reached his own? Was it some dim sense of that ruined grace that had made him so suddenly, and almost without cause, give utterance, in Basil Hallward’s studio, to the mad prayer that had so changed his life? Here, in gold-embroidered red doublet, jewelled surcoat, and gilt-edged ruff and wristbands, stood Sir Anthony Sherard, with his silver-and-black armour piled at his feet. What had this man’s legacy been? Had the lover of Giovanna of Naples bequeathed him some inheritance of sin and shame? Were his own actions merely the dreams that the dead man had not dared to realize? Here, from the fading canvas, smiled Lady Elizabeth Devereux, in her gauze hood, pearl stomacher, and pink slashed sleeves. A flower was in her right hand, and her left clasped an enamelled collar of white and damask roses. On a table by her side lay a mandolin and an apple. There were large green rosettes upon her little pointed shoes. He knew her life, and the strange stories that were told about her lovers. Had he something of her temperament in him? These oval, heavy-lidded eyes seemed to look curiously at him. What of George Willoughby, with his powdered hair and fantastic patches? How evil he looked! The face was saturnine and swarthy, and the sensual lips seemed to be twisted with disdain. Delicate lace ruffles fell over the lean yellow hands that were so overladen with rings. He had been a macaroni of the eighteenth century, and the friend, in his youth, of Lord Ferrars. What of the second Lord Beckenham, the companion of the Prince Regent in his wildest days, and one of the witnesses at the secret marriage with Mrs. Fitzherbert? How proud and handsome he was, with his chestnut curls and insolent pose! What passions had he bequeathed? The world had looked upon him as infamous. He had led the orgies at Carlton House. The star of the Garter glittered upon his breast. Beside him hung the portrait of his wife, a pallid, thin-lipped woman in black. Her blood, also, stirred within him. How curious it all seemed! And his mother with her Lady Hamilton face and her moist, wine-dashed lips—he knew what he had got from her. He had got from her his beauty, and his passion for the beauty of others. She laughed at him in her loose Bacchante dress. There were vine leaves in her hair. The purple spilled from the cup she was holding. The carnations of the painting had withered, but the eyes were still wonderful in their depth and brilliancy of colour. They seemed to follow him wherever he went.

Yet one had ancestors in literature as well as in one’s own race, nearer perhaps in type and temperament, many of them, and certainly with an influence of which one was more absolutely conscious. There were times when it appeared to Dorian Gray that the whole of history was merely the record of his own life, not as he had lived it in act and circumstance, but as his imagination had created it for him, as it had been in his brain and in his passions. He felt that he had known them all, those strange terrible figures that had passed across the stage of the world and made sin so marvellous and evil so full of subtlety. It seemed to him that in some mysterious way their lives had been his own.

The hero of the wonderful novel that had so influenced his life had himself known this curious fancy. In the seventh chapter he tells how, crowned with laurel, lest lightning might strike him, he had sat, as Tiberius, in a garden at Capri, reading the shameful books of Elephantis, while dwarfs and peacocks strutted round him and the flute-player mocked the swinger of the censer; and, as Caligula, had caroused with the green-shirted jockeys in their stables and supped in an ivory manger with a jewel-frontleted horse; and, as Domitian, had wandered through a corridor lined with marble mirrors, looking round with haggard eyes for the reflection of the dagger that was to end his days, and sick with that ennui, that terrible tædium vitæ, that comes on those to whom life denies nothing; and had peered through a clear emerald at the red shambles of the circus and then, in a litter of pearl and purple drawn by silver-shod mules, been carried through the Street of Pomegranates to a House of Gold and heard men cry on Nero Caesar as he passed by; and, as Elagabalus, had painted his face with colours, and plied the distaff among the women, and brought the Moon from Carthage and given her in mystic marriage to the Sun.

Over and over again Dorian used to read this fantastic chapter, and the two chapters immediately following, in which, as in some curious tapestries or cunningly wrought enamels, were pictured the awful and beautiful forms of those whom vice and blood and weariness had made monstrous or mad: Filippo, Duke of Milan, who slew his wife and painted her lips with a scarlet poison that her lover might suck death from the dead thing he fondled; Pietro Barbi, the Venetian, known as Paul the Second, who sought in his vanity to assume the title of Formosus, and whose tiara, valued at two hundred thousand florins, was bought at the price of a terrible sin; Gian Maria Visconti, who used hounds to chase living men and whose murdered body was covered with roses by a harlot who had loved him; the Borgia on his white horse, with Fratricide riding beside him and his mantle stained with the blood of Perotto; Pietro Riario, the young Cardinal Archbishop of Florence, child and minion of Sixtus IV., whose beauty was equalled only by his debauchery, and who received Leonora of Aragon in a pavilion of white and crimson silk, filled with nymphs and centaurs, and gilded a boy that he might serve at the feast as Ganymede or Hylas; Ezzelin, whose melancholy could be cured only by the spectacle of death, and who had a passion for red blood, as other men have for red wine—the son of the Fiend, as was reported, and one who had cheated his father at dice when gambling with him for his own soul; Giambattista Cibo, who in mockery took the name of Innocent and into whose torpid veins the blood of three lads was infused by a Jewish doctor; Sigismondo Malatesta, the lover of Isotta and the lord of Rimini, whose effigy was burned at Rome as the enemy of God and man, who strangled Polyssena with a napkin, and gave poison to Ginevra d’Este in a cup of emerald, and in honour of a shameful passion built a pagan church for Christian worship; Charles VI., who had so wildly adored his brother’s wife that a leper had warned him of the insanity that was coming on him, and who, when his brain had sickened and grown strange, could only be soothed by Saracen cards painted with the images of love and death and madness; and, in his trimmed jerkin and jewelled cap and acanthuslike curls, Grifonetto Baglioni, who slew Astorre with his bride, and Simonetto with his page, and whose comeliness was such that, as he lay dying in the yellow piazza of Perugia, those who had hated him could not choose but weep, and Atalanta, who had cursed him, blessed him.

There was a horrible fascination in them all. He saw them at night, and they troubled his imagination in the day. The Renaissance knew of strange manners of poisoning—poisoning by a helmet and a lighted torch, by an embroidered glove and a jewelled fan, by a gilded pomander and by an amber chain. Dorian Gray had been poisoned by a book. There were moments when he looked on evil simply as a mode through which he could realize his conception of the beautiful.
It was on the ninth of November, the eve of his own thirty-eighth birthday, as he often remembered afterwards.

He was walking home about eleven o’clock from Lord Henry’s, where he had been dining, and was wrapped in heavy furs, as the night was cold and foggy. At the corner of Grosvenor Square and South Audley Street, a man passed him in the mist, walking very fast and with the collar of his grey ulster turned up. He had a bag in his hand. Dorian recognized him. It was Basil Hallward. A strange sense of fear, for which he could not account, came over him. He made no sign of recognition and went on quickly in the direction of his own house.

But Hallward had seen him. Dorian heard him first stopping on the pavement and then hurrying after him. In a few moments, his hand was on his arm.

“Dorian! What an extraordinary piece of luck! I have been waiting for you in your library ever since nine o’clock. Finally I took pity on your tired servant and told him to go to bed, as he let me out. I am off to Paris by the midnight train, and I particularly wanted to see you before I left. I thought it was you, or rather your fur coat, as you passed me. But I wasn’t quite sure. Didn’t you recognize me?”

“In this fog, my dear Basil? Why, I can’t even recognize Grosvenor Square. I believe my house is somewhere about here, but I don’t feel at all certain about it. I am sorry you are going away, as I have not seen you for ages. But I suppose you will be back soon?”

“No: I am going to be out of England for six months. I intend to take a studio in Paris and shut myself up till I have finished a great picture I have in my head. However, it wasn’t about myself I wanted to talk. Here we are at your door. Let me come in for a moment. I have something to say to you.”

“I shall be charmed. But won’t you miss your train?” said Dorian Gray languidly as he passed up the steps and opened the door with his latch-key.

The lamplight struggled out through the fog, and Hallward looked at his watch. “I have heaps of time,” he answered. “The train doesn’t go till twelve-fifteen, and it is only just eleven. In fact, I was on my way to the club to look for you, when I met you. You see, I shan’t have any delay about luggage, as I have sent on my heavy things. All I have with me is in this bag, and I can easily get to Victoria in twenty minutes.”

Dorian looked at him and smiled. “What a way for a fashionable painter to travel! A Gladstone bag and an ulster! Come in, or the fog will get into the house. And mind you don’t talk about anything serious. Nothing is serious nowadays. At least nothing should be.”

Hallward shook his head, as he entered, and followed Dorian into the library. There was a bright wood fire blazing in the large open hearth. The lamps were lit, and an open Dutch silver spirit-case stood, with some siphons of soda-water and large cut-glass tumblers, on a little marqueterie table.

“You see your servant made me quite at home, Dorian. He gave me everything I wanted, including your best gold-tipped cigarettes. He is a most hospitable creature. I like him much better than the Frenchman you used to have. What has become of the Frenchman, by the bye?”

Dorian shrugged his shoulders. “I believe he married Lady Radley’s maid, and has established her in Paris as an English dressmaker. Anglomanie is very fashionable over there now, I hear. It seems silly of the French, doesn’t it? But—do you know?—he was not at all a bad servant. I never liked him, but I had nothing to complain about. One often imagines things that are quite absurd. He was really very devoted to me and seemed quite sorry when he went away. Have another brandy-and-soda? Or would you like hock-and-seltzer? I always take hock-and-seltzer myself. There is sure to be some in the next room.”

“Thanks, I won’t have anything more,” said the painter, taking his cap and coat off and throwing them on the bag that he had placed in the corner. “And now, my dear fellow, I want to speak to you seriously. Don’t frown like that. You make it so much more difficult for me.”

“What is it all about?” cried Dorian in his petulant way, flinging himself down on the sofa. “I hope it is not about myself. I am tired of myself to-night. I should like to be somebody else.”

“It is about yourself,” answered Hallward in his grave deep voice, “and I must say it to you. I shall only keep you half an hour.”

Dorian sighed and lit a cigarette. “Half an hour!” he murmured.

“It is not much to ask of you, Dorian, and it is entirely for your own sake that I am speaking. I think it right that you should know that the most dreadful things are being said against you in London.”

“I don’t wish to know anything about them. I love scandals about other people, but scandals about myself don’t interest me. They have not got the charm of novelty.”

“They must interest you, Dorian. Every gentleman is interested in his good name. You don’t want people to talk of you as something vile and degraded. Of course, you have your position, and your wealth, and all that kind of thing. But position and wealth are not everything. Mind you, I don’t believe these rumours at all. At least, I can’t believe them when I see you. Sin is a thing that writes itself across a man’s face. It cannot be concealed. People talk sometimes of secret vices. There are no such things. If a wretched man has a vice, it shows itself in the lines of his mouth, the droop of his eyelids, the moulding of his hands even. Somebody—I won’t mention his name, but you know him—came to me last year to have his portrait done. I had never seen him before, and had never heard anything about him at the time, though I have heard a good deal since. He offered an extravagant price. I refused him. There was something in the shape of his fingers that I hated. I know now that I was quite right in what I fancied about him. His life is dreadful. But you, Dorian, with your pure, bright, innocent face, and your marvellous untroubled youth—I can’t believe anything against you. And yet I see you very seldom, and you never come down to the studio now, and when I am away from you, and I hear all these hideous things that people are whispering about you, I don’t know what to say. Why is it, Dorian, that a man like the Duke of Berwick leaves the room of a club when you enter it? Why is it that so many gentlemen in London will neither go to your house or invite you to theirs? You used to be a friend of Lord Staveley. I met him at dinner last week. Your name happened to come up in conversation, in connection with the miniatures you have lent to the exhibition at the Dudley. Staveley curled his lip and said that you might have the most artistic tastes, but that you were a man whom no pure-minded girl should be allowed to know, and whom no chaste woman should sit in the same room with. I reminded him that I was a friend of yours, and asked him what he meant. He told me. He told me right out before everybody. It was horrible! Why is your friendship so fatal to young men? There was that wretched boy in the Guards who committed suicide. You were his great friend. There was Sir Henry Ashton, who had to leave England with a tarnished name. You and he were inseparable. What about Adrian Singleton and his dreadful end? What about Lord Kent’s only son and his career? I met his father yesterday in St. James’s Street. He seemed broken with shame and sorrow. What about the young Duke of Perth? What sort of life has he got now? What gentleman would associate with him?”

“Stop, Basil. You are talking about things of which you know nothing,” said Dorian Gray, biting his lip, and with a note of infinite contempt in his voice. “You ask me why Berwick leaves a room when I enter it. It is because I know everything about his life, not because he knows anything about mine. With such blood as he has in his veins, how could his record be clean? You ask me about Henry Ashton and young Perth. Did I teach the one his vices, and the other his debauchery? If Kent’s silly son takes his wife from the streets, what is that to me? If Adrian Singleton writes his friend’s name across a bill, am I his keeper? I know how people chatter in England. The middle classes air their moral prejudices over their gross dinner-tables, and whisper about what they call the profligacies of their betters in order to try and pretend that they are in smart society and on intimate terms with the people they slander. In this country, it is enough for a man to have distinction and brains for every common tongue to wag against him. And what sort of lives do these people, who pose as being moral, lead themselves? My dear fellow, you forget that we are in the native land of the hypocrite.”

“Dorian,” cried Hallward, “that is not the question. England is bad enough I know, and English society is all wrong. That is the reason why I want you to be fine. You have not been fine. One has a right to judge of a man by the effect he has over his friends. Yours seem to lose all sense of honour, of goodness, of purity. You have filled them with a madness for pleasure. They have gone down into the depths. You led them there. Yes: you led them there, and yet you can smile, as you are smiling now. And there is worse behind. I know you and Harry are inseparable. Surely for that reason, if for none other, you should not have made his sister’s name a by-word.”

“Take care, Basil. You go too far.”

“I must speak, and you must listen. You shall listen. When you met Lady Gwendolen, not a breath of scandal had ever touched her. Is there a single decent woman in London now who would drive with her in the park? Why, even her children are not allowed to live with her. Then there are other stories—stories that you have been seen creeping at dawn out of dreadful houses and slinking in disguise into the foulest dens in London. Are they true? Can they be true? When I first heard them, I laughed. I hear them now, and they make me shudder. What about your country-house and the life that is led there? Dorian, you don’t know what is said about you. I won’t tell you that I don’t want to preach to you. I remember Harry saying once that every man who turned himself into an amateur curate for the moment always began by saying that, and then proceeded to break his word. I do want to preach to you. I want you to lead such a life as will make the world respect you. I want you to have a clean name and a fair record. I want you to get rid of the dreadful people you associate with. Don’t shrug your shoulders like that. Don’t be so indifferent. You have a wonderful influence. Let it be for good, not for evil. They say that you corrupt every one with whom you become intimate, and that it is quite sufficient for you to enter a house for shame of some kind to follow after. I don’t know whether it is so or not. How should I know? But it is said of you. I am told things that it seems impossible to doubt. Lord Gloucester was one of my greatest friends at Oxford. He showed me a letter that his wife had written to him when she was dying alone in her villa at Mentone. Your name was implicated in the most terrible confession I ever read. I told him that it was absurd—that I knew you thoroughly and that you were incapable of anything of the kind. Know you? I wonder do I know you? Before I could answer that, I should have to see your soul.”

“To see my soul!” muttered Dorian Gray, starting up from the sofa and turning almost white from fear.

“Yes,” answered Hallward gravely, and with deep-toned sorrow in his voice, “to see your soul. But only God can do that.”

A bitter laugh of mockery broke from the lips of the younger man. “You shall see it yourself, to-night!” he cried, seizing a lamp from the table. “Come: it is your own handiwork. Why shouldn’t you look at it? You can tell the world all about it afterwards, if you choose. Nobody would believe you. If they did believe you, they would like me all the better for it. I know the age better than you do, though you will prate about it so tediously. Come, I tell you. You have chattered enough about corruption. Now you shall look on it face to face.”

There was the madness of pride in every word he uttered. He stamped his foot upon the ground in his boyish insolent manner. He felt a terrible joy at the thought that some one else was to share his secret, and that the man who had painted the portrait that was the origin of all his shame was to be burdened for the rest of his life with the hideous memory of what he had done.

“Yes,” he continued, coming closer to him and looking steadfastly into his stern eyes, “I shall show you my soul. You shall see the thing that you fancy only God can see.”

Hallward started back. “This is blasphemy, Dorian!” he cried. “You must not say things like that. They are horrible, and they don’t mean anything.”

“You think so?” He laughed again.

“I know so. As for what I said to you to-night, I said it for your good. You know I have been always a stanch friend to you.”

“Don’t touch me. Finish what you have to say.”

A twisted flash of pain shot across the painter’s face. He paused for a moment, and a wild feeling of pity came over him. After all, what right had he to pry into the life of Dorian Gray? If he had done a tithe of what was rumoured about him, how much he must have suffered! Then he straightened himself up, and walked over to the fire-place, and stood there, looking at the burning logs with their frostlike ashes and their throbbing cores of flame.

“I am waiting, Basil,” said the young man in a hard clear voice.

He turned round. “What I have to say is this,” he cried. “You must give me some answer to these horrible charges that are made against you. If you tell me that they are absolutely untrue from beginning to end, I shall believe you. Deny them, Dorian, deny them! Can’t you see what I am going through? My God! don’t tell me that you are bad, and corrupt, and shameful.”

Dorian Gray smiled. There was a curl of contempt in his lips. “Come upstairs, Basil,” he said quietly. “I keep a diary of my life from day to day, and it never leaves the room in which it is written. I shall show it to you if you come with me.”

“I shall come with you, Dorian, if you wish it. I see I have missed my train. That makes no matter. I can go to-morrow. But don’t ask me to read anything to-night. All I want is a plain answer to my question.”

“That shall be given to you upstairs. I could not give it here. You will not have to read long.”
He passed out of the room and began the ascent, Basil Hallward following close behind. They walked softly, as men do instinctively at night. The lamp cast fantastic shadows on the wall and staircase. A rising wind made some of the windows rattle.

When they reached the top landing, Dorian set the lamp down on the floor, and taking out the key, turned it in the lock. “You insist on knowing, Basil?” he asked in a low voice.

“Yes.”

“I am delighted,” he answered, smiling. Then he added, somewhat harshly, “You are the one man in the world who is entitled to know everything about me. You have had more to do with my life than you think”; and, taking up the lamp, he opened the door and went in. A cold current of air passed them, and the light shot up for a moment in a flame of murky orange. He shuddered. “Shut the door behind you,” he whispered, as he placed the lamp on the table.

Hallward glanced round him with a puzzled expression. The room looked as if it had not been lived in for years. A faded Flemish tapestry, a curtained picture, an old Italian cassone, and an almost empty book-case—that was all that it seemed to contain, besides a chair and a table. As Dorian Gray was lighting a half-burned candle that was standing on the mantelshelf, he saw that the whole place was covered with dust and that the carpet was in holes. A mouse ran scuffling behind the wainscoting. There was a damp odour of mildew.

“So you think that it is only God who sees the soul, Basil? Draw that curtain back, and you will see mine.”

The voice that spoke was cold and cruel. “You are mad, Dorian, or playing a part,” muttered Hallward, frowning.

“You won’t? Then I must do it myself,” said the young man, and he tore the curtain from its rod and flung it on the ground.

An exclamation of horror broke from the painter’s lips as he saw in the dim light the hideous face on the canvas grinning at him. There was something in its expression that filled him with disgust and loathing. Good heavens! it was Dorian Gray’s own face that he was looking at! The horror, whatever it was, had not yet entirely spoiled that marvellous beauty. There was still some gold in the thinning hair and some scarlet on the sensual mouth. The sodden eyes had kept something of the loveliness of their blue, the noble curves had not yet completely passed away from chiselled nostrils and from plastic throat. Yes, it was Dorian himself. But who had done it? He seemed to recognize his own brushwork, and the frame was his own design. The idea was monstrous, yet he felt afraid. He seized the lighted candle, and held it to the picture. In the left-hand corner was his own name, traced in long letters of bright vermilion.

It was some foul parody, some infamous ignoble satire. He had never done that. Still, it was his own picture. He knew it, and he felt as if his blood had changed in a moment from fire to sluggish ice. His own picture! What did it mean? Why had it altered? He turned and looked at Dorian Gray with the eyes of a sick man. His mouth twitched, and his parched tongue seemed unable to articulate. He passed his hand across his forehead. It was dank with clammy sweat.

The young man was leaning against the mantelshelf, watching him with that strange expression that one sees on the faces of those who are absorbed in a play when some great artist is acting. There was neither real sorrow in it nor real joy. There was simply the passion of the spectator, with perhaps a flicker of triumph in his eyes. He had taken the flower out of his coat, and was smelling it, or pretending to do so.

“What does this mean?” cried Hallward, at last. His own voice sounded shrill and curious in his ears.

“Years ago, when I was a boy,” said Dorian Gray, crushing the flower in his hand, “you met me, flattered me, and taught me to be vain of my good looks. One day you introduced me to a friend of yours, who explained to me the wonder of youth, and you finished a portrait of me that revealed to me the wonder of beauty. In a mad moment that, even now, I don’t know whether I regret or not, I made a wish, perhaps you would call it a prayer....”

“I remember it! Oh, how well I remember it! No! the thing is impossible. The room is damp. Mildew has got into the canvas. The paints I used had some wretched mineral poison in them. I tell you the thing is impossible.”

“Ah, what is impossible?” murmured the young man, going over to the window and leaning his forehead against the cold, mist-stained glass.

“You told me you had destroyed it.”

“I was wrong. It has destroyed me.”

“I don’t believe it is my picture.”

“Can’t you see your ideal in it?” said Dorian bitterly.

“My ideal, as you call it...”

“As you called it.”

“There was nothing evil in it, nothing shameful. You were to me such an ideal as I shall never meet again. This is the face of a satyr.”

“It is the face of my soul.”

“Christ! what a thing I must have worshipped! It has the eyes of a devil.”

“Each of us has heaven and hell in him, Basil,” cried Dorian with a wild gesture of despair.

Hallward turned again to the portrait and gazed at it. “My God! If it is true,” he exclaimed, “and this is what you have done with your life, why, you must be worse even than those who talk against you fancy you to be!” He held the light up again to the canvas and examined it. The surface seemed to be quite undisturbed and as he had left it. It was from within, apparently, that the foulness and horror had come. Through some strange quickening of inner life the leprosies of sin were slowly eating the thing away. The rotting of a corpse in a watery grave was not so fearful.

His hand shook, and the candle fell from its socket on the floor and lay there sputtering. He placed his foot on it and put it out. Then he flung himself into the rickety chair that was standing by the table and buried his face in his hands.

“Good God, Dorian, what a lesson! What an awful lesson!” There was no answer, but he could hear the young man sobbing at the window. “Pray, Dorian, pray,” he murmured. “What is it that one was taught to say in one’s boyhood? ‘Lead us not into temptation. Forgive us our sins. Wash away our iniquities.’ Let us say that together. The prayer of your pride has been answered. The prayer of your repentance will be answered also. I worshipped you too much. I am punished for it. You worshipped yourself too much. We are both punished.”

Dorian Gray turned slowly around and looked at him with tear-dimmed eyes. “It is too late, Basil,” he faltered.

“It is never too late, Dorian. Let us kneel down and try if we cannot remember a prayer. Isn’t there a verse somewhere, ‘Though your sins be as scarlet, yet I will make them as white as snow’?”

“Those words mean nothing to me now.”

“Hush! Don’t say that. You have done enough evil in your life. My God! Don’t you see that accursed thing leering at us?”

Dorian Gray glanced at the picture, and suddenly an uncontrollable feeling of hatred for Basil Hallward came over him, as though it had been suggested to him by the image on the canvas, whispered into his ear by those grinning lips. The mad passions of a hunted animal stirred within him, and he loathed the man who was seated at the table, more than in his whole life he had ever loathed anything. He glanced wildly around. Something glimmered on the top of the painted chest that faced him. His eye fell on it. He knew what it was. It was a knife that he had brought up, some days before, to cut a piece of cord, and had forgotten to take away with him. He moved slowly towards it, passing Hallward as he did so. As soon as he got behind him, he seized it and turned round. Hallward stirred in his chair as if he was going to rise. He rushed at him and dug the knife into the great vein that is behind the ear, crushing the man’s head down on the table and stabbing again and again.

There was a stifled groan and the horrible sound of some one choking with blood. Three times the outstretched arms shot up convulsively, waving grotesque, stiff-fingered hands in the air. He stabbed him twice more, but the man did not move. Something began to trickle on the floor. He waited for a moment, still pressing the head down. Then he threw the knife on the table, and listened.

He could hear nothing, but the drip, drip on the threadbare carpet. He opened the door and went out on the landing. The house was absolutely quiet. No one was about. For a few seconds he stood bending over the balustrade and peering down into the black seething well of darkness. Then he took out the key and returned to the room, locking himself in as he did so.

The thing was still seated in the chair, straining over the table with bowed head, and humped back, and long fantastic arms. Had it not been for the red jagged tear in the neck and the clotted black pool that was slowly widening on the table, one would have said that the man was simply asleep.

How quickly it had all been done! He felt strangely calm, and walking over to the window, opened it and stepped out on the balcony. The wind had blown the fog away, and the sky was like a monstrous peacock’s tail, starred with myriads of golden eyes. He looked down and saw the policeman going his rounds and flashing the long beam of his lantern on the doors of the silent houses. The crimson spot of a prowling hansom gleamed at the corner and then vanished. A woman in a fluttering shawl was creeping slowly by the railings, staggering as she went. Now and then she stopped and peered back. Once, she began to sing in a hoarse voice. The policeman strolled over and said something to her. She stumbled away, laughing. A bitter blast swept across the square. The gas-lamps flickered and became blue, and the leafless trees shook their black iron branches to and fro. He shivered and went back, closing the window behind him.

Having reached the door, he turned the key and opened it. He did not even glance at the murdered man. He felt that the secret of the whole thing was not to realize the situation. The friend who had painted the fatal portrait to which all his misery had been due had gone out of his life. That was enough.

Then he remembered the lamp. It was a rather curious one of Moorish workmanship, made of dull silver inlaid with arabesques of burnished steel, and studded with coarse turquoises. Perhaps it might be missed by his servant, and questions would be asked. He hesitated for a moment, then he turned back and took it from the table. He could not help seeing the dead thing. How still it was! How horribly white the long hands looked! It was like a dreadful wax image.

Having locked the door behind him, he crept quietly downstairs. The woodwork creaked and seemed to cry out as if in pain. He stopped several times and waited. No: everything was still. It was merely the sound of his own footsteps.

When he reached the library, he saw the bag and coat in the corner. They must be hidden away somewhere. He unlocked a secret press that was in the wainscoting, a press in which he kept his own curious disguises, and put them into it. He could easily burn them afterwards. Then he pulled out his watch. It was twenty minutes to two.

He sat down and began to think. Every year—every month, almost—men were strangled in England for what he had done. There had been a madness of murder in the air. Some red star had come too close to the earth.... And yet, what evidence was there against him? Basil Hallward had left the house at eleven. No one had seen him come in again. Most of the servants were at Selby Royal. His valet had gone to bed.... Paris! Yes. It was to Paris that Basil had gone, and by the midnight train, as he had intended. With his curious reserved habits, it would be months before any suspicions would be roused. Months! Everything could be destroyed long before then.

A sudden thought struck him. He put on his fur coat and hat and went out into the hall. There he paused, hearing the slow heavy tread of the policeman on the pavement outside and seeing the flash of the bull’s-eye reflected in the window. He waited and held his breath.

After a few moments he drew back the latch and slipped out, shutting the door very gently behind him. Then he began ringing the bell. In about five minutes his valet appeared, half-dressed and looking very drowsy.

“I am sorry to have had to wake you up, Francis,” he said, stepping in; “but I had forgotten my latch-key. What time is it?”

“Ten minutes past two, sir,” answered the man, looking at the clock and blinking.

“Ten minutes past two? How horribly late! You must wake me at nine to-morrow. I have some work to do.”

“All right, sir.”

“Did any one call this evening?”

“Mr. Hallward, sir. He stayed here till eleven, and then he went away to catch his train.”

“Oh! I am sorry I didn’t see him. Did he leave any message?”

“No, sir, except that he would write to you from Paris, if he did not find you at the club.”

“That will do, Francis. Don’t forget to call me at nine to-morrow.”

“No, sir.”

The man shambled down the passage in his slippers.

Dorian Gray threw his hat and coat upon the table and passed into the library. For a quarter of an hour he walked up and down the room, biting his lip and thinking. Then he took down the Blue Book from one of the shelves and began to turn over the leaves. “Alan Campbell, 152, Hertford Street, Mayfair.” Yes; that was the man he wanted.
At nine o’clock the next morning his servant came in with a cup of chocolate on a tray and opened the shutters. Dorian was sleeping quite peacefully, lying on his right side, with one hand underneath his cheek. He looked like a boy who had been tired out with play, or study.

The man had to touch him twice on the shoulder before he woke, and as he opened his eyes a faint smile passed across his lips, as though he had been lost in some delightful dream. Yet he had not dreamed at all. His night had been untroubled by any images of pleasure or of pain. But youth smiles without any reason. It is one of its chiefest charms.

He turned round, and leaning upon his elbow, began to sip his chocolate. The mellow November sun came streaming into the room. The sky was bright, and there was a genial warmth in the air. It was almost like a morning in May.

Gradually the events of the preceding night crept with silent, blood-stained feet into his brain and reconstructed themselves there with terrible distinctness. He winced at the memory of all that he had suffered, and for a moment the same curious feeling of loathing for Basil Hallward that had made him kill him as he sat in the chair came back to him, and he grew cold with passion. The dead man was still sitting there, too, and in the sunlight now. How horrible that was! Such hideous things were for the darkness, not for the day.

He felt that if he brooded on what he had gone through he would sicken or grow mad. There were sins whose fascination was more in the memory than in the doing of them, strange triumphs that gratified the pride more than the passions, and gave to the intellect a quickened sense of joy, greater than any joy they brought, or could ever bring, to the senses. But this was not one of them. It was a thing to be driven out of the mind, to be drugged with poppies, to be strangled lest it might strangle one itself.

When the half-hour struck, he passed his hand across his forehead, and then got up hastily and dressed himself with even more than his usual care, giving a good deal of attention to the choice of his necktie and scarf-pin and changing his rings more than once. He spent a long time also over breakfast, tasting the various dishes, talking to his valet about some new liveries that he was thinking of getting made for the servants at Selby, and going through his correspondence. At some of the letters, he smiled. Three of them bored him. One he read several times over and then tore up with a slight look of annoyance in his face. “That awful thing, a woman’s memory!” as Lord Henry had once said.

After he had drunk his cup of black coffee, he wiped his lips slowly with a napkin, motioned to his servant to wait, and going over to the table, sat down and wrote two letters. One he put in his pocket, the other he handed to the valet.

“Take this round to 152, Hertford Street, Francis, and if Mr. Campbell is out of town, get his address.”

As soon as he was alone, he lit a cigarette and began sketching upon a piece of paper, drawing first flowers and bits of architecture, and then human faces. Suddenly he remarked that every face that he drew seemed to have a fantastic likeness to Basil Hallward. He frowned, and getting up, went over to the book-case and took out a volume at hazard. He was determined that he would not think about what had happened until it became absolutely necessary that he should do so.

When he had stretched himself on the sofa, he looked at the title-page of the book. It was Gautier’s “Émaux et Camées”, Charpentier’s Japanese-paper edition, with the Jacquemart etching. The binding was of citron-green leather, with a design of gilt trellis-work and dotted pomegranates. It had been given to him by Adrian Singleton. As he turned over the pages, his eye fell on the poem about the hand of Lacenaire, the cold yellow hand “du supplice encore mal lavée,” with its downy red hairs and its “doigts de faune.” He glanced at his own white taper fingers, shuddering slightly in spite of himself, and passed on, till he came to those lovely stanzas upon Venice:

Sur une gamme chromatique,
    Le sein de perles ruisselant,
La Vénus de l’Adriatique
    Sort de l’eau son corps rose et blanc.

Les dômes, sur l’azur des ondes
    Suivant la phrase au pur contour,
S’enflent comme des gorges rondes
    Que soulève un soupir d’amour.

L’esquif aborde et me dépose,
    Jetant son amarre au pilier,
Devant une façade rose,
    Sur le marbre d’un escalier.

How exquisite they were! As one read them, one seemed to be floating down the green water-ways of the pink and pearl city, seated in a black gondola with silver prow and trailing curtains. The mere lines looked to him like those straight lines of turquoise-blue that follow one as one pushes out to the Lido. The sudden flashes of colour reminded him of the gleam of the opal-and-iris-throated birds that flutter round the tall honeycombed Campanile, or stalk, with such stately grace, through the dim, dust-stained arcades. Leaning back with half-closed eyes, he kept saying over and over to himself:

“Devant une façade rose,
Sur le marbre d’un escalier.”

The whole of Venice was in those two lines. He remembered the autumn that he had passed there, and a wonderful love that had stirred him to mad delightful follies. There was romance in every place. But Venice, like Oxford, had kept the background for romance, and, to the true romantic, background was everything, or almost everything. Basil had been with him part of the time, and had gone wild over Tintoret. Poor Basil! What a horrible way for a man to die!

He sighed, and took up the volume again, and tried to forget. He read of the swallows that fly in and out of the little café at Smyrna where the Hadjis sit counting their amber beads and the turbaned merchants smoke their long tasselled pipes and talk gravely to each other; he read of the Obelisk in the Place de la Concorde that weeps tears of granite in its lonely sunless exile and longs to be back by the hot, lotus-covered Nile, where there are Sphinxes, and rose-red ibises, and white vultures with gilded claws, and crocodiles with small beryl eyes that crawl over the green steaming mud; he began to brood over those verses which, drawing music from kiss-stained marble, tell of that curious statue that Gautier compares to a contralto voice, the “monstre charmant” that couches in the porphyry-room of the Louvre. But after a time the book fell from his hand. He grew nervous, and a horrible fit of terror came over him. What if Alan Campbell should be out of England? Days would elapse before he could come back. Perhaps he might refuse to come. What could he do then? Every moment was of vital importance.

They had been great friends once, five years before—almost inseparable, indeed. Then the intimacy had come suddenly to an end. When they met in society now, it was only Dorian Gray who smiled: Alan Campbell never did.

He was an extremely clever young man, though he had no real appreciation of the visible arts, and whatever little sense of the beauty of poetry he possessed he had gained entirely from Dorian. His dominant intellectual passion was for science. At Cambridge he had spent a great deal of his time working in the laboratory, and had taken a good class in the Natural Science Tripos of his year. Indeed, he was still devoted to the study of chemistry, and had a laboratory of his own in which he used to shut himself up all day long, greatly to the annoyance of his mother, who had set her heart on his standing for Parliament and had a vague idea that a chemist was a person who made up prescriptions. He was an excellent musician, however, as well, and played both the violin and the piano better than most amateurs. In fact, it was music that had first brought him and Dorian Gray together—music and that indefinable attraction that Dorian seemed to be able to exercise whenever he wished—and, indeed, exercised often without being conscious of it. They had met at Lady Berkshire’s the night that Rubinstein played there, and after that used to be always seen together at the opera and wherever good music was going on. For eighteen months their intimacy lasted. Campbell was always either at Selby Royal or in Grosvenor Square. To him, as to many others, Dorian Gray was the type of everything that is wonderful and fascinating in life. Whether or not a quarrel had taken place between them no one ever knew. But suddenly people remarked that they scarcely spoke when they met and that Campbell seemed always to go away early from any party at which Dorian Gray was present. He had changed, too—was strangely melancholy at times, appeared almost to dislike hearing music, and would never himself play, giving as his excuse, when he was called upon, that he was so absorbed in science that he had no time left in which to practise. And this was certainly true. Every day he seemed to become more interested in biology, and his name appeared once or twice in some of the scientific reviews in connection with certain curious experiments.

This was the man Dorian Gray was waiting for. Every second he kept glancing at the clock. As the minutes went by he became horribly agitated. At last he got up and began to pace up and down the room, looking like a beautiful caged thing. He took long stealthy strides. His hands were curiously cold.

The suspense became unbearable. Time seemed to him to be crawling with feet of lead, while he by monstrous winds was being swept towards the jagged edge of some black cleft of precipice. He knew what was waiting for him there; saw it, indeed, and, shuddering, crushed with dank hands his burning lids as though he would have robbed the very brain of sight and driven the eyeballs back into their cave. It was useless. The brain had its own food on which it battened, and the imagination, made grotesque by terror, twisted and distorted as a living thing by pain, danced like some foul puppet on a stand and grinned through moving masks. Then, suddenly, time stopped for him. Yes: that blind, slow-breathing thing crawled no more, and horrible thoughts, time being dead, raced nimbly on in front, and dragged a hideous future from its grave, and showed it to him. He stared at it. Its very horror made him stone.

At last the door opened and his servant entered. He turned glazed eyes upon him.

“Mr. Campbell, sir,” said the man.

A sigh of relief broke from his parched lips, and the colour came back to his cheeks.

“Ask him to come in at once, Francis.” He felt that he was himself again. His mood of cowardice had passed away.

The man bowed and retired. In a few moments, Alan Campbell walked in, looking very stern and rather pale, his pallor being intensified by his coal-black hair and dark eyebrows.

“Alan! This is kind of you. I thank you for coming.”

“I had intended never to enter your house again, Gray. But you said it was a matter of life and death.” His voice was hard and cold. He spoke with slow deliberation. There was a look of contempt in the steady searching gaze that he turned on Dorian. He kept his hands in the pockets of his Astrakhan coat, and seemed not to have noticed the gesture with which he had been greeted.

“Yes: it is a matter of life and death, Alan, and to more than one person. Sit down.”

Campbell took a chair by the table, and Dorian sat opposite to him. The two men’s eyes met. In Dorian’s there was infinite pity. He knew that what he was going to do was dreadful.

After a strained moment of silence, he leaned across and said, very quietly, but watching the effect of each word upon the face of him he had sent for, “Alan, in a locked room at the top of this house, a room to which nobody but myself has access, a dead man is seated at a table. He has been dead ten hours now. Don’t stir, and don’t look at me like that. Who the man is, why he died, how he died, are matters that do not concern you. What you have to do is this—”

“Stop, Gray. I don’t want to know anything further. Whether what you have told me is true or not true doesn’t concern me. I entirely decline to be mixed up in your life. Keep your horrible secrets to yourself. They don’t interest me any more.”

“Alan, they will have to interest you. This one will have to interest you. I am awfully sorry for you, Alan. But I can’t help myself. You are the one man who is able to save me. I am forced to bring you into the matter. I have no option. Alan, you are scientific. You know about chemistry and things of that kind. You have made experiments. What you have got to do is to destroy the thing that is upstairs—to destroy it so that not a vestige of it will be left. Nobody saw this person come into the house. Indeed, at the present moment he is supposed to be in Paris. He will not be missed for months. When he is missed, there must be no trace of him found here. You, Alan, you must change him, and everything that belongs to him, into a handful of ashes that I may scatter in the air.”

“You are mad, Dorian.”

“Ah! I was waiting for you to call me Dorian.”

“You are mad, I tell you—mad to imagine that I would raise a finger to help you, mad to make this monstrous confession. I will have nothing to do with this matter, whatever it is. Do you think I am going to peril my reputation for you? What is it to me what devil’s work you are up to?”

“It was suicide, Alan.”

“I am glad of that. But who drove him to it? You, I should fancy.”

“Do you still refuse to do this for me?”

“Of course I refuse. I will have absolutely nothing to do with it. I don’t care what shame comes on you. You deserve it all. I should not be sorry to see you disgraced, publicly disgraced. How dare you ask me, of all men in the world, to mix myself up in this horror? I should have thought you knew more about people’s characters. Your friend Lord Henry Wotton can’t have taught you much about psychology, whatever else he has taught you. Nothing will induce me to stir a step to help you. You have come to the wrong man. Go to some of your friends. Don’t come to me.”

“Alan, it was murder. I killed him. You don’t know what he had made me suffer. Whatever my life is, he had more to do with the making or the marring of it than poor Harry has had. He may not have intended it, the result was the same.”

“Murder! Good God, Dorian, is that what you have come to? I shall not inform upon you. It is not my business. Besides, without my stirring in the matter, you are certain to be arrested. Nobody ever commits a crime without doing something stupid. But I will have nothing to do with it.”

“You must have something to do with it. Wait, wait a moment; listen to me. Only listen, Alan. All I ask of you is to perform a certain scientific experiment. You go to hospitals and dead-houses, and the horrors that you do there don’t affect you. If in some hideous dissecting-room or fetid laboratory you found this man lying on a leaden table with red gutters scooped out in it for the blood to flow through, you would simply look upon him as an admirable subject. You would not turn a hair. You would not believe that you were doing anything wrong. On the contrary, you would probably feel that you were benefiting the human race, or increasing the sum of knowledge in the world, or gratifying intellectual curiosity, or something of that kind. What I want you to do is merely what you have often done before. Indeed, to destroy a body must be far less horrible than what you are accustomed to work at. And, remember, it is the only piece of evidence against me. If it is discovered, I am lost; and it is sure to be discovered unless you help me.”

“I have no desire to help you. You forget that. I am simply indifferent to the whole thing. It has nothing to do with me.”

“Alan, I entreat you. Think of the position I am in. Just before you came I almost fainted with terror. You may know terror yourself some day. No! don’t think of that. Look at the matter purely from the scientific point of view. You don’t inquire where the dead things on which you experiment come from. Don’t inquire now. I have told you too much as it is. But I beg of you to do this. We were friends once, Alan.”

“Don’t speak about those days, Dorian—they are dead.”

“The dead linger sometimes. The man upstairs will not go away. He is sitting at the table with bowed head and outstretched arms. Alan! Alan! If you don’t come to my assistance, I am ruined. Why, they will hang me, Alan! Don’t you understand? They will hang me for what I have done.”

“There is no good in prolonging this scene. I absolutely refuse to do anything in the matter. It is insane of you to ask me.”

“You refuse?”

“Yes.”

“I entreat you, Alan.”

“It is useless.”

The same look of pity came into Dorian Gray’s eyes. Then he stretched out his hand, took a piece of paper, and wrote something on it. He read it over twice, folded it carefully, and pushed it across the table. Having done this, he got up and went over to the window.

Campbell looked at him in surprise, and then took up the paper, and opened it. As he read it, his face became ghastly pale and he fell back in his chair. A horrible sense of sickness came over him. He felt as if his heart was beating itself to death in some empty hollow.

After two or three minutes of terrible silence, Dorian turned round and came and stood behind him, putting his hand upon his shoulder.

“I am so sorry for you, Alan,” he murmured, “but you leave me no alternative. I have a letter written already. Here it is. You see the address. If you don’t help me, I must send it. If you don’t help me, I will send it. You know what the result will be. But you are going to help me. It is impossible for you to refuse now. I tried to spare you. You will do me the justice to admit that. You were stern, harsh, offensive. You treated me as no man has ever dared to treat me—no living man, at any rate. I bore it all. Now it is for me to dictate terms.”

Campbell buried his face in his hands, and a shudder passed through him.

“Yes, it is my turn to dictate terms, Alan. You know what they are. The thing is quite simple. Come, don’t work yourself into this fever. The thing has to be done. Face it, and do it.”

A groan broke from Campbell’s lips and he shivered all over. The ticking of the clock on the mantelpiece seemed to him to be dividing time into separate atoms of agony, each of which was too terrible to be borne. He felt as if an iron ring was being slowly tightened round his forehead, as if the disgrace with which he was threatened had already come upon him. The hand upon his shoulder weighed like a hand of lead. It was intolerable. It seemed to crush him.

“Come, Alan, you must decide at once.”

“I cannot do it,” he said, mechanically, as though words could alter things.

“You must. You have no choice. Don’t delay.”

He hesitated a moment. “Is there a fire in the room upstairs?”

“Yes, there is a gas-fire with asbestos.”

“I shall have to go home and get some things from the laboratory.”

“No, Alan, you must not leave the house. Write out on a sheet of notepaper what you want and my servant will take a cab and bring the things back to you.”

Campbell scrawled a few lines, blotted them, and addressed an envelope to his assistant. Dorian took the note up and read it carefully. Then he rang the bell and gave it to his valet, with orders to return as soon as possible and to bring the things with him.

As the hall door shut, Campbell started nervously, and having got up from the chair, went over to the chimney-piece. He was shivering with a kind of ague. For nearly twenty minutes, neither of the men spoke. A fly buzzed noisily about the room, and the ticking of the clock was like the beat of a hammer.

As the chime struck one, Campbell turned round, and looking at Dorian Gray, saw that his eyes were filled with tears. There was something in the purity and refinement of that sad face that seemed to enrage him. “You are infamous, absolutely infamous!” he muttered.

“Hush, Alan. You have saved my life,” said Dorian.

“Your life? Good heavens! what a life that is! You have gone from corruption to corruption, and now you have culminated in crime. In doing what I am going to do—what you force me to do—it is not of your life that I am thinking.”

“Ah, Alan,” murmured Dorian with a sigh, “I wish you had a thousandth part of the pity for me that I have for you.” He turned away as he spoke and stood looking out at the garden. Campbell made no answer.

After about ten minutes a knock came to the door, and the servant entered, carrying a large mahogany chest of chemicals, with a long coil of steel and platinum wire and two rather curiously shaped iron clamps.

“Shall I leave the things here, sir?” he asked Campbell.

“Yes,” said Dorian. “And I am afraid, Francis, that I have another errand for you. What is the name of the man at Richmond who supplies Selby with orchids?”

“Harden, sir.”

“Yes—Harden. You must go down to Richmond at once, see Harden personally, and tell him to send twice as many orchids as I ordered, and to have as few white ones as possible. In fact, I don’t want any white ones. It is a lovely day, Francis, and Richmond is a very pretty place—otherwise I wouldn’t bother you about it.”

“No trouble, sir. At what time shall I be back?”

Dorian looked at Campbell. “How long will your experiment take, Alan?” he said in a calm indifferent voice. The presence of a third person in the room seemed to give him extraordinary courage.

Campbell frowned and bit his lip. “It will take about five hours,” he answered.

“It will be time enough, then, if you are back at half-past seven, Francis. Or stay: just leave my things out for dressing. You can have the evening to yourself. I am not dining at home, so I shall not want you.”

“Thank you, sir,” said the man, leaving the room.

“Now, Alan, there is not a moment to be lost. How heavy this chest is! I’ll take it for you. You bring the other things.” He spoke rapidly and in an authoritative manner. Campbell felt dominated by him. They left the room together.

When they reached the top landing, Dorian took out the key and turned it in the lock. Then he stopped, and a troubled look came into his eyes. He shuddered. “I don’t think I can go in, Alan,” he murmured.

“It is nothing to me. I don’t require you,” said Campbell coldly.

Dorian half opened the door. As he did so, he saw the face of his portrait leering in the sunlight. On the floor in front of it the torn curtain was lying. He remembered that the night before he had forgotten, for the first time in his life, to hide the fatal canvas, and was about to rush forward, when he drew back with a shudder.

What was that loathsome red dew that gleamed, wet and glistening, on one of the hands, as though the canvas had sweated blood? How horrible it was!—more horrible, it seemed to him for the moment, than the silent thing that he knew was stretched across the table, the thing whose grotesque misshapen shadow on the spotted carpet showed him that it had not stirred, but was still there, as he had left it.

He heaved a deep breath, opened the door a little wider, and with half-closed eyes and averted head, walked quickly in, determined that he would not look even once upon the dead man. Then, stooping down and taking up the gold-and-purple hanging, he flung it right over the picture.

There he stopped, feeling afraid to turn round, and his eyes fixed themselves on the intricacies of the pattern before him. He heard Campbell bringing in the heavy chest, and the irons, and the other things that he had required for his dreadful work. He began to wonder if he and Basil Hallward had ever met, and, if so, what they had thought of each other.

“Leave me now,” said a stern voice behind him.

He turned and hurried out, just conscious that the dead man had been thrust back into the chair and that Campbell was gazing into a glistening yellow face. As he was going downstairs, he heard the key being turned in the lock.

It was long after seven when Campbell came back into the library. He was pale, but absolutely calm. “I have done what you asked me to do,” he muttered. “And now, good-bye. Let us never see each other again.”

“You have saved me from ruin, Alan. I cannot forget that,” said Dorian simply.

As soon as Campbell had left, he went upstairs. There was a horrible smell of nitric acid in the room. But the thing that had been sitting at the table was gone.
That evening, at eight-thirty, exquisitely dressed and wearing a large button-hole of Parma violets, Dorian Gray was ushered into Lady Narborough’s drawing-room by bowing servants. His forehead was throbbing with maddened nerves, and he felt wildly excited, but his manner as he bent over his hostess’s hand was as easy and graceful as ever. Perhaps one never seems so much at one’s ease as when one has to play a part. Certainly no one looking at Dorian Gray that night could have believed that he had passed through a tragedy as horrible as any tragedy of our age. Those finely shaped fingers could never have clutched a knife for sin, nor those smiling lips have cried out on God and goodness. He himself could not help wondering at the calm of his demeanour, and for a moment felt keenly the terrible pleasure of a double life.

It was a small party, got up rather in a hurry by Lady Narborough, who was a very clever woman with what Lord Henry used to describe as the remains of really remarkable ugliness. She had proved an excellent wife to one of our most tedious ambassadors, and having buried her husband properly in a marble mausoleum, which she had herself designed, and married off her daughters to some rich, rather elderly men, she devoted herself now to the pleasures of French fiction, French cookery, and French esprit when she could get it.

Dorian was one of her especial favourites, and she always told him that she was extremely glad she had not met him in early life. “I know, my dear, I should have fallen madly in love with you,” she used to say, “and thrown my bonnet right over the mills for your sake. It is most fortunate that you were not thought of at the time. As it was, our bonnets were so unbecoming, and the mills were so occupied in trying to raise the wind, that I never had even a flirtation with anybody. However, that was all Narborough’s fault. He was dreadfully short-sighted, and there is no pleasure in taking in a husband who never sees anything.”

Her guests this evening were rather tedious. The fact was, as she explained to Dorian, behind a very shabby fan, one of her married daughters had come up quite suddenly to stay with her, and, to make matters worse, had actually brought her husband with her. “I think it is most unkind of her, my dear,” she whispered. “Of course I go and stay with them every summer after I come from Homburg, but then an old woman like me must have fresh air sometimes, and besides, I really wake them up. You don’t know what an existence they lead down there. It is pure unadulterated country life. They get up early, because they have so much to do, and go to bed early, because they have so little to think about. There has not been a scandal in the neighbourhood since the time of Queen Elizabeth, and consequently they all fall asleep after dinner. You shan’t sit next either of them. You shall sit by me and amuse me.”

Dorian murmured a graceful compliment and looked round the room. Yes: it was certainly a tedious party. Two of the people he had never seen before, and the others consisted of Ernest Harrowden, one of those middle-aged mediocrities so common in London clubs who have no enemies, but are thoroughly disliked by their friends; Lady Ruxton, an overdressed woman of forty-seven, with a hooked nose, who was always trying to get herself compromised, but was so peculiarly plain that to her great disappointment no one would ever believe anything against her; Mrs. Erlynne, a pushing nobody, with a delightful lisp and Venetian-red hair; Lady Alice Chapman, his hostess’s daughter, a dowdy dull girl, with one of those characteristic British faces that, once seen, are never remembered; and her husband, a red-cheeked, white-whiskered creature who, like so many of his class, was under the impression that inordinate joviality can atone for an entire lack of ideas.

He was rather sorry he had come, till Lady Narborough, looking at the great ormolu gilt clock that sprawled in gaudy curves on the mauve-draped mantelshelf, exclaimed: “How horrid of Henry Wotton to be so late! I sent round to him this morning on chance and he promised faithfully not to disappoint me.”

It was some consolation that Harry was to be there, and when the door opened and he heard his slow musical voice lending charm to some insincere apology, he ceased to feel bored.

But at dinner he could not eat anything. Plate after plate went away untasted. Lady Narborough kept scolding him for what she called “an insult to poor Adolphe, who invented the menu specially for you,” and now and then Lord Henry looked across at him, wondering at his silence and abstracted manner. From time to time the butler filled his glass with champagne. He drank eagerly, and his thirst seemed to increase.

“Dorian,” said Lord Henry at last, as the chaud-froid was being handed round, “what is the matter with you to-night? You are quite out of sorts.”

“I believe he is in love,” cried Lady Narborough, “and that he is afraid to tell me for fear I should be jealous. He is quite right. I certainly should.”

“Dear Lady Narborough,” murmured Dorian, smiling, “I have not been in love for a whole week—not, in fact, since Madame de Ferrol left town.”

“How you men can fall in love with that woman!” exclaimed the old lady. “I really cannot understand it.”

“It is simply because she remembers you when you were a little girl, Lady Narborough,” said Lord Henry. “She is the one link between us and your short frocks.”

“She does not remember my short frocks at all, Lord Henry. But I remember her very well at Vienna thirty years ago, and how décolletée she was then.”

“She is still décolletée,” he answered, taking an olive in his long fingers; “and when she is in a very smart gown she looks like an édition de luxe of a bad French novel. She is really wonderful, and full of surprises. Her capacity for family affection is extraordinary. When her third husband died, her hair turned quite gold from grief.”

“How can you, Harry!” cried Dorian.

“It is a most romantic explanation,” laughed the hostess. “But her third husband, Lord Henry! You don’t mean to say Ferrol is the fourth?”

“Certainly, Lady Narborough.”

“I don’t believe a word of it.”

“Well, ask Mr. Gray. He is one of her most intimate friends.”

“Is it true, Mr. Gray?”

“She assures me so, Lady Narborough,” said Dorian. “I asked her whether, like Marguerite de Navarre, she had their hearts embalmed and hung at her girdle. She told me she didn’t, because none of them had had any hearts at all.”

“Four husbands! Upon my word that is trop de zêle.”

“Trop d’audace, I tell her,” said Dorian.

“Oh! she is audacious enough for anything, my dear. And what is Ferrol like? I don’t know him.”

“The husbands of very beautiful women belong to the criminal classes,” said Lord Henry, sipping his wine.

Lady Narborough hit him with her fan. “Lord Henry, I am not at all surprised that the world says that you are extremely wicked.”

“But what world says that?” asked Lord Henry, elevating his eyebrows. “It can only be the next world. This world and I are on excellent terms.”

“Everybody I know says you are very wicked,” cried the old lady, shaking her head.

Lord Henry looked serious for some moments. “It is perfectly monstrous,” he said, at last, “the way people go about nowadays saying things against one behind one’s back that are absolutely and entirely true.”

“Isn’t he incorrigible?” cried Dorian, leaning forward in his chair.

“I hope so,” said his hostess, laughing. “But really, if you all worship Madame de Ferrol in this ridiculous way, I shall have to marry again so as to be in the fashion.”

“You will never marry again, Lady Narborough,” broke in Lord Henry. “You were far too happy. When a woman marries again, it is because she detested her first husband. When a man marries again, it is because he adored his first wife. Women try their luck; men risk theirs.”

“Narborough wasn’t perfect,” cried the old lady.

“If he had been, you would not have loved him, my dear lady,” was the rejoinder. “Women love us for our defects. If we have enough of them, they will forgive us everything, even our intellects. You will never ask me to dinner again after saying this, I am afraid, Lady Narborough, but it is quite true.”

“Of course it is true, Lord Henry. If we women did not love you for your defects, where would you all be? Not one of you would ever be married. You would be a set of unfortunate bachelors. Not, however, that that would alter you much. Nowadays all the married men live like bachelors, and all the bachelors like married men.”

“Fin de siêcle,” murmured Lord Henry.

“Fin du globe,” answered his hostess.

“I wish it were fin du globe,” said Dorian with a sigh. “Life is a great disappointment.”

“Ah, my dear,” cried Lady Narborough, putting on her gloves, “don’t tell me that you have exhausted life. When a man says that one knows that life has exhausted him. Lord Henry is very wicked, and I sometimes wish that I had been; but you are made to be good—you look so good. I must find you a nice wife. Lord Henry, don’t you think that Mr. Gray should get married?”

“I am always telling him so, Lady Narborough,” said Lord Henry with a bow.

“Well, we must look out for a suitable match for him. I shall go through Debrett carefully to-night and draw out a list of all the eligible young ladies.”

“With their ages, Lady Narborough?” asked Dorian.

“Of course, with their ages, slightly edited. But nothing must be done in a hurry. I want it to be what The Morning Post calls a suitable alliance, and I want you both to be happy.”

“What nonsense people talk about happy marriages!” exclaimed Lord Henry. “A man can be happy with any woman, as long as he does not love her.”

“Ah! what a cynic you are!” cried the old lady, pushing back her chair and nodding to Lady Ruxton. “You must come and dine with me soon again. You are really an admirable tonic, much better than what Sir Andrew prescribes for me. You must tell me what people you would like to meet, though. I want it to be a delightful gathering.”

“I like men who have a future and women who have a past,” he answered. “Or do you think that would make it a petticoat party?”

“I fear so,” she said, laughing, as she stood up. “A thousand pardons, my dear Lady Ruxton,” she added, “I didn’t see you hadn’t finished your cigarette.”

“Never mind, Lady Narborough. I smoke a great deal too much. I am going to limit myself, for the future.”

“Pray don’t, Lady Ruxton,” said Lord Henry. “Moderation is a fatal thing. Enough is as bad as a meal. More than enough is as good as a feast.”

Lady Ruxton glanced at him curiously. “You must come and explain that to me some afternoon, Lord Henry. It sounds a fascinating theory,” she murmured, as she swept out of the room.

“Now, mind you don’t stay too long over your politics and scandal,” cried Lady Narborough from the door. “If you do, we are sure to squabble upstairs.”

The men laughed, and Mr. Chapman got up solemnly from the foot of the table and came up to the top. Dorian Gray changed his seat and went and sat by Lord Henry. Mr. Chapman began to talk in a loud voice about the situation in the House of Commons. He guffawed at his adversaries. The word doctrinaire—word full of terror to the British mind—reappeared from time to time between his explosions. An alliterative prefix served as an ornament of oratory. He hoisted the Union Jack on the pinnacles of thought. The inherited stupidity of the race—sound English common sense he jovially termed it—was shown to be the proper bulwark for society.

A smile curved Lord Henry’s lips, and he turned round and looked at Dorian.

“Are you better, my dear fellow?” he asked. “You seemed rather out of sorts at dinner.”

“I am quite well, Harry. I am tired. That is all.”

“You were charming last night. The little duchess is quite devoted to you. She tells me she is going down to Selby.”

“She has promised to come on the twentieth.”

“Is Monmouth to be there, too?”

“Oh, yes, Harry.”

“He bores me dreadfully, almost as much as he bores her. She is very clever, too clever for a woman. She lacks the indefinable charm of weakness. It is the feet of clay that make the gold of the image precious. Her feet are very pretty, but they are not feet of clay. White porcelain feet, if you like. They have been through the fire, and what fire does not destroy, it hardens. She has had experiences.”

“How long has she been married?” asked Dorian.

“An eternity, she tells me. I believe, according to the peerage, it is ten years, but ten years with Monmouth must have been like eternity, with time thrown in. Who else is coming?”

“Oh, the Willoughbys, Lord Rugby and his wife, our hostess, Geoffrey Clouston, the usual set. I have asked Lord Grotrian.”

“I like him,” said Lord Henry. “A great many people don’t, but I find him charming. He atones for being occasionally somewhat overdressed by being always absolutely over-educated. He is a very modern type.”

“I don’t know if he will be able to come, Harry. He may have to go to Monte Carlo with his father.”

“Ah! what a nuisance people’s people are! Try and make him come. By the way, Dorian, you ran off very early last night. You left before eleven. What did you do afterwards? Did you go straight home?”

Dorian glanced at him hurriedly and frowned.

“No, Harry,” he said at last, “I did not get home till nearly three.”

“Did you go to the club?”

“Yes,” he answered. Then he bit his lip. “No, I don’t mean that. I didn’t go to the club. I walked about. I forget what I did.... How inquisitive you are, Harry! You always want to know what one has been doing. I always want to forget what I have been doing. I came in at half-past two, if you wish to know the exact time. I had left my latch-key at home, and my servant had to let me in. If you want any corroborative evidence on the subject, you can ask him.”

Lord Henry shrugged his shoulders. “My dear fellow, as if I cared! Let us go up to the drawing-room. No sherry, thank you, Mr. Chapman. Something has happened to you, Dorian. Tell me what it is. You are not yourself to-night.”

“Don’t mind me, Harry. I am irritable, and out of temper. I shall come round and see you to-morrow, or next day. Make my excuses to Lady Narborough. I shan’t go upstairs. I shall go home. I must go home.”

“All right, Dorian. I dare say I shall see you to-morrow at tea-time. The duchess is coming.”

“I will try to be there, Harry,” he said, leaving the room. As he drove back to his own house, he was conscious that the sense of terror he thought he had strangled had come back to him. Lord Henry’s casual questioning had made him lose his nerve for the moment, and he wanted his nerve still. Things that were dangerous had to be destroyed. He winced. He hated the idea of even touching them.

Yet it had to be done. He realized that, and when he had locked the door of his library, he opened the secret press into which he had thrust Basil Hallward’s coat and bag. A huge fire was blazing. He piled another log on it. The smell of the singeing clothes and burning leather was horrible. It took him three-quarters of an hour to consume everything. At the end he felt faint and sick, and having lit some Algerian pastilles in a pierced copper brazier, he bathed his hands and forehead with a cool musk-scented vinegar.

Suddenly he started. His eyes grew strangely bright, and he gnawed nervously at his underlip. Between two of the windows stood a large Florentine cabinet, made out of ebony and inlaid with ivory and blue lapis. He watched it as though it were a thing that could fascinate and make afraid, as though it held something that he longed for and yet almost loathed. His breath quickened. A mad craving came over him. He lit a cigarette and then threw it away. His eyelids drooped till the long fringed lashes almost touched his cheek. But he still watched the cabinet. At last he got up from the sofa on which he had been lying, went over to it, and having unlocked it, touched some hidden spring. A triangular drawer passed slowly out. His fingers moved instinctively towards it, dipped in, and closed on something. It was a small Chinese box of black and gold-dust lacquer, elaborately wrought, the sides patterned with curved waves, and the silken cords hung with round crystals and tasselled in plaited metal threads. He opened it. Inside was a green paste, waxy in lustre, the odour curiously heavy and persistent.

He hesitated for some moments, with a strangely immobile smile upon his face. Then shivering, though the atmosphere of the room was terribly hot, he drew himself up and glanced at the clock. It was twenty minutes to twelve. He put the box back, shutting the cabinet doors as he did so, and went into his bedroom.

As midnight was striking bronze blows upon the dusky air, Dorian Gray, dressed commonly, and with a muffler wrapped round his throat, crept quietly out of his house. In Bond Street he found a hansom with a good horse. He hailed it and in a low voice gave the driver an address.

The man shook his head. “It is too far for me,” he muttered.

“Here is a sovereign for you,” said Dorian. “You shall have another if you drive fast.”

“All right, sir,” answered the man, “you will be there in an hour,” and after his fare had got in he turned his horse round and drove rapidly towards the river.
A cold rain began to fall, and the blurred street-lamps looked ghastly in the dripping mist. The public-houses were just closing, and dim men and women were clustering in broken groups round their doors. From some of the bars came the sound of horrible laughter. In others, drunkards brawled and screamed.

Lying back in the hansom, with his hat pulled over his forehead, Dorian Gray watched with listless eyes the sordid shame of the great city, and now and then he repeated to himself the words that Lord Henry had said to him on the first day they had met, “To cure the soul by means of the senses, and the senses by means of the soul.” Yes, that was the secret. He had often tried it, and would try it again now. There were opium dens where one could buy oblivion, dens of horror where the memory of old sins could be destroyed by the madness of sins that were new.

The moon hung low in the sky like a yellow skull. From time to time a huge misshapen cloud stretched a long arm across and hid it. The gas-lamps grew fewer, and the streets more narrow and gloomy. Once the man lost his way and had to drive back half a mile. A steam rose from the horse as it splashed up the puddles. The sidewindows of the hansom were clogged with a grey-flannel mist.

“To cure the soul by means of the senses, and the senses by means of the soul!” How the words rang in his ears! His soul, certainly, was sick to death. Was it true that the senses could cure it? Innocent blood had been spilled. What could atone for that? Ah! for that there was no atonement; but though forgiveness was impossible, forgetfulness was possible still, and he was determined to forget, to stamp the thing out, to crush it as one would crush the adder that had stung one. Indeed, what right had Basil to have spoken to him as he had done? Who had made him a judge over others? He had said things that were dreadful, horrible, not to be endured.

On and on plodded the hansom, going slower, it seemed to him, at each step. He thrust up the trap and called to the man to drive faster. The hideous hunger for opium began to gnaw at him. His throat burned and his delicate hands twitched nervously together. He struck at the horse madly with his stick. The driver laughed and whipped up. He laughed in answer, and the man was silent.

The way seemed interminable, and the streets like the black web of some sprawling spider. The monotony became unbearable, and as the mist thickened, he felt afraid.

Then they passed by lonely brickfields. The fog was lighter here, and he could see the strange, bottle-shaped kilns with their orange, fanlike tongues of fire. A dog barked as they went by, and far away in the darkness some wandering sea-gull screamed. The horse stumbled in a rut, then swerved aside and broke into a gallop.

After some time they left the clay road and rattled again over rough-paven streets. Most of the windows were dark, but now and then fantastic shadows were silhouetted against some lamplit blind. He watched them curiously. They moved like monstrous marionettes and made gestures like live things. He hated them. A dull rage was in his heart. As they turned a corner, a woman yelled something at them from an open door, and two men ran after the hansom for about a hundred yards. The driver beat at them with his whip.

It is said that passion makes one think in a circle. Certainly with hideous iteration the bitten lips of Dorian Gray shaped and reshaped those subtle words that dealt with soul and sense, till he had found in them the full expression, as it were, of his mood, and justified, by intellectual approval, passions that without such justification would still have dominated his temper. From cell to cell of his brain crept the one thought; and the wild desire to live, most terrible of all man’s appetites, quickened into force each trembling nerve and fibre. Ugliness that had once been hateful to him because it made things real, became dear to him now for that very reason. Ugliness was the one reality. The coarse brawl, the loathsome den, the crude violence of disordered life, the very vileness of thief and outcast, were more vivid, in their intense actuality of impression, than all the gracious shapes of art, the dreamy shadows of song. They were what he needed for forgetfulness. In three days he would be free.

Suddenly the man drew up with a jerk at the top of a dark lane. Over the low roofs and jagged chimney-stacks of the houses rose the black masts of ships. Wreaths of white mist clung like ghostly sails to the yards.

“Somewhere about here, sir, ain’t it?” he asked huskily through the trap.

Dorian started and peered round. “This will do,” he answered, and having got out hastily and given the driver the extra fare he had promised him, he walked quickly in the direction of the quay. Here and there a lantern gleamed at the stern of some huge merchantman. The light shook and splintered in the puddles. A red glare came from an outward-bound steamer that was coaling. The slimy pavement looked like a wet mackintosh.

He hurried on towards the left, glancing back now and then to see if he was being followed. In about seven or eight minutes he reached a small shabby house that was wedged in between two gaunt factories. In one of the top-windows stood a lamp. He stopped and gave a peculiar knock.

After a little time he heard steps in the passage and the chain being unhooked. The door opened quietly, and he went in without saying a word to the squat misshapen figure that flattened itself into the shadow as he passed. At the end of the hall hung a tattered green curtain that swayed and shook in the gusty wind which had followed him in from the street. He dragged it aside and entered a long low room which looked as if it had once been a third-rate dancing-saloon. Shrill flaring gas-jets, dulled and distorted in the fly-blown mirrors that faced them, were ranged round the walls. Greasy reflectors of ribbed tin backed them, making quivering disks of light. The floor was covered with ochre-coloured sawdust, trampled here and there into mud, and stained with dark rings of spilled liquor. Some Malays were crouching by a little charcoal stove, playing with bone counters and showing their white teeth as they chattered. In one corner, with his head buried in his arms, a sailor sprawled over a table, and by the tawdrily painted bar that ran across one complete side stood two haggard women, mocking an old man who was brushing the sleeves of his coat with an expression of disgust. “He thinks he’s got red ants on him,” laughed one of them, as Dorian passed by. The man looked at her in terror and began to whimper.

At the end of the room there was a little staircase, leading to a darkened chamber. As Dorian hurried up its three rickety steps, the heavy odour of opium met him. He heaved a deep breath, and his nostrils quivered with pleasure. When he entered, a young man with smooth yellow hair, who was bending over a lamp lighting a long thin pipe, looked up at him and nodded in a hesitating manner.

“You here, Adrian?” muttered Dorian.

“Where else should I be?” he answered, listlessly. “None of the chaps will speak to me now.”

“I thought you had left England.”

“Darlington is not going to do anything. My brother paid the bill at last. George doesn’t speak to me either.... I don’t care,” he added with a sigh. “As long as one has this stuff, one doesn’t want friends. I think I have had too many friends.”

Dorian winced and looked round at the grotesque things that lay in such fantastic postures on the ragged mattresses. The twisted limbs, the gaping mouths, the staring lustreless eyes, fascinated him. He knew in what strange heavens they were suffering, and what dull hells were teaching them the secret of some new joy. They were better off than he was. He was prisoned in thought. Memory, like a horrible malady, was eating his soul away. From time to time he seemed to see the eyes of Basil Hallward looking at him. Yet he felt he could not stay. The presence of Adrian Singleton troubled him. He wanted to be where no one would know who he was. He wanted to escape from himself.

“I am going on to the other place,” he said after a pause.

“On the wharf?”

“Yes.”

“That mad-cat is sure to be there. They won’t have her in this place now.”

Dorian shrugged his shoulders. “I am sick of women who love one. Women who hate one are much more interesting. Besides, the stuff is better.”

“Much the same.”

“I like it better. Come and have something to drink. I must have something.”

“I don’t want anything,” murmured the young man.

“Never mind.”

Adrian Singleton rose up wearily and followed Dorian to the bar. A half-caste, in a ragged turban and a shabby ulster, grinned a hideous greeting as he thrust a bottle of brandy and two tumblers in front of them. The women sidled up and began to chatter. Dorian turned his back on them and said something in a low voice to Adrian Singleton.

A crooked smile, like a Malay crease, writhed across the face of one of the women. “We are very proud to-night,” she sneered.

“For God’s sake don’t talk to me,” cried Dorian, stamping his foot on the ground. “What do you want? Money? Here it is. Don’t ever talk to me again.”

Two red sparks flashed for a moment in the woman’s sodden eyes, then flickered out and left them dull and glazed. She tossed her head and raked the coins off the counter with greedy fingers. Her companion watched her enviously.

“It’s no use,” sighed Adrian Singleton. “I don’t care to go back. What does it matter? I am quite happy here.”

“You will write to me if you want anything, won’t you?” said Dorian, after a pause.

“Perhaps.”

“Good night, then.”

“Good night,” answered the young man, passing up the steps and wiping his parched mouth with a handkerchief.

Dorian walked to the door with a look of pain in his face. As he drew the curtain aside, a hideous laugh broke from the painted lips of the woman who had taken his money. “There goes the devil’s bargain!” she hiccoughed, in a hoarse voice.

“Curse you!” he answered, “don’t call me that.”

She snapped her fingers. “Prince Charming is what you like to be called, ain’t it?” she yelled after him.

The drowsy sailor leaped to his feet as she spoke, and looked wildly round. The sound of the shutting of the hall door fell on his ear. He rushed out as if in pursuit.

Dorian Gray hurried along the quay through the drizzling rain. His meeting with Adrian Singleton had strangely moved him, and he wondered if the ruin of that young life was really to be laid at his door, as Basil Hallward had said to him with such infamy of insult. He bit his lip, and for a few seconds his eyes grew sad. Yet, after all, what did it matter to him? One’s days were too brief to take the burden of another’s errors on one’s shoulders. Each man lived his own life and paid his own price for living it. The only pity was one had to pay so often for a single fault. One had to pay over and over again, indeed. In her dealings with man, destiny never closed her accounts.

There are moments, psychologists tell us, when the passion for sin, or for what the world calls sin, so dominates a nature that every fibre of the body, as every cell of the brain, seems to be instinct with fearful impulses. Men and women at such moments lose the freedom of their will. They move to their terrible end as automatons move. Choice is taken from them, and conscience is either killed, or, if it lives at all, lives but to give rebellion its fascination and disobedience its charm. For all sins, as theologians weary not of reminding us, are sins of disobedience. When that high spirit, that morning star of evil, fell from heaven, it was as a rebel that he fell.

Callous, concentrated on evil, with stained mind, and soul hungry for rebellion, Dorian Gray hastened on, quickening his step as he went, but as he darted aside into a dim archway, that had served him often as a short cut to the ill-famed place where he was going, he felt himself suddenly seized from behind, and before he had time to defend himself, he was thrust back against the wall, with a brutal hand round his throat.

He struggled madly for life, and by a terrible effort wrenched the tightening fingers away. In a second he heard the click of a revolver, and saw the gleam of a polished barrel, pointing straight at his head, and the dusky form of a short, thick-set man facing him.

“What do you want?” he gasped.

“Keep quiet,” said the man. “If you stir, I shoot you.”

“You are mad. What have I done to you?”

“You wrecked the life of Sibyl Vane,” was the answer, “and Sibyl Vane was my sister. She killed herself. I know it. Her death is at your door. I swore I would kill you in return. For years I have sought you. I had no clue, no trace. The two people who could have described you were dead. I knew nothing of you but the pet name she used to call you. I heard it to-night by chance. Make your peace with God, for to-night you are going to die.”

Dorian Gray grew sick with fear. “I never knew her,” he stammered. “I never heard of her. You are mad.”

“You had better confess your sin, for as sure as I am James Vane, you are going to die.” There was a horrible moment. Dorian did not know what to say or do. “Down on your knees!” growled the man. “I give you one minute to make your peace—no more. I go on board to-night for India, and I must do my job first. One minute. That’s all.”

Dorian’s arms fell to his side. Paralysed with terror, he did not know what to do. Suddenly a wild hope flashed across his brain. “Stop,” he cried. “How long ago is it since your sister died? Quick, tell me!”

“Eighteen years,” said the man. “Why do you ask me? What do years matter?”

“Eighteen years,” laughed Dorian Gray, with a touch of triumph in his voice. “Eighteen years! Set me under the lamp and look at my face!”

James Vane hesitated for a moment, not understanding what was meant. Then he seized Dorian Gray and dragged him from the archway.

Dim and wavering as was the wind-blown light, yet it served to show him the hideous error, as it seemed, into which he had fallen, for the face of the man he had sought to kill had all the bloom of boyhood, all the unstained purity of youth. He seemed little more than a lad of twenty summers, hardly older, if older indeed at all, than his sister had been when they had parted so many years ago. It was obvious that this was not the man who had destroyed her life.

He loosened his hold and reeled back. “My God! my God!” he cried, “and I would have murdered you!”

Dorian Gray drew a long breath. “You have been on the brink of committing a terrible crime, my man,” he said, looking at him sternly. “Let this be a warning to you not to take vengeance into your own hands.”

“Forgive me, sir,” muttered James Vane. “I was deceived. A chance word I heard in that damned den set me on the wrong track.”

“You had better go home and put that pistol away, or you may get into trouble,” said Dorian, turning on his heel and going slowly down the street.

James Vane stood on the pavement in horror. He was trembling from head to foot. After a little while, a black shadow that had been creeping along the dripping wall moved out into the light and came close to him with stealthy footsteps. He felt a hand laid on his arm and looked round with a start. It was one of the women who had been drinking at the bar.

“Why didn’t you kill him?” she hissed out, putting haggard face quite close to his. “I knew you were following him when you rushed out from Daly’s. You fool! You should have killed him. He has lots of money, and he’s as bad as bad.”

“He is not the man I am looking for,” he answered, “and I want no man’s money. I want a man’s life. The man whose life I want must be nearly forty now. This one is little more than a boy. Thank God, I have not got his blood upon my hands.”

The woman gave a bitter laugh. “Little more than a boy!” she sneered. “Why, man, it’s nigh on eighteen years since Prince Charming made me what I am.”

“You lie!” cried James Vane.

She raised her hand up to heaven. “Before God I am telling the truth,” she cried.

“Before God?”

“Strike me dumb if it ain’t so. He is the worst one that comes here. They say he has sold himself to the devil for a pretty face. It’s nigh on eighteen years since I met him. He hasn’t changed much since then. I have, though,” she added, with a sickly leer.

“You swear this?”

“I swear it,” came in hoarse echo from her flat mouth. “But don’t give me away to him,” she whined; “I am afraid of him. Let me have some money for my night’s lodging.”

He broke from her with an oath and rushed to the corner of the street, but Dorian Gray had disappeared. When he looked back, the woman had vanished also.
A week later Dorian Gray was sitting in the conservatory at Selby Royal, talking to the pretty Duchess of Monmouth, who with her husband, a jaded-looking man of sixty, was amongst his guests. It was tea-time, and the mellow light of the huge, lace-covered lamp that stood on the table lit up the delicate china and hammered silver of the service at which the duchess was presiding. Her white hands were moving daintily among the cups, and her full red lips were smiling at something that Dorian had whispered to her. Lord Henry was lying back in a silk-draped wicker chair, looking at them. On a peach-coloured divan sat Lady Narborough, pretending to listen to the duke’s description of the last Brazilian beetle that he had added to his collection. Three young men in elaborate smoking-suits were handing tea-cakes to some of the women. The house-party consisted of twelve people, and there were more expected to arrive on the next day.

“What are you two talking about?” said Lord Henry, strolling over to the table and putting his cup down. “I hope Dorian has told you about my plan for rechristening everything, Gladys. It is a delightful idea.”

“But I don’t want to be rechristened, Harry,” rejoined the duchess, looking up at him with her wonderful eyes. “I am quite satisfied with my own name, and I am sure Mr. Gray should be satisfied with his.”

“My dear Gladys, I would not alter either name for the world. They are both perfect. I was thinking chiefly of flowers. Yesterday I cut an orchid, for my button-hole. It was a marvellous spotted thing, as effective as the seven deadly sins. In a thoughtless moment I asked one of the gardeners what it was called. He told me it was a fine specimen of Robinsoniana, or something dreadful of that kind. It is a sad truth, but we have lost the faculty of giving lovely names to things. Names are everything. I never quarrel with actions. My one quarrel is with words. That is the reason I hate vulgar realism in literature. The man who could call a spade a spade should be compelled to use one. It is the only thing he is fit for.”

“Then what should we call you, Harry?” she asked.

“His name is Prince Paradox,” said Dorian.

“I recognize him in a flash,” exclaimed the duchess.

“I won’t hear of it,” laughed Lord Henry, sinking into a chair. “From a label there is no escape! I refuse the title.”

“Royalties may not abdicate,” fell as a warning from pretty lips.

“You wish me to defend my throne, then?”

“Yes.”

“I give the truths of to-morrow.”

“I prefer the mistakes of to-day,” she answered.

“You disarm me, Gladys,” he cried, catching the wilfulness of her mood.

“Of your shield, Harry, not of your spear.”

“I never tilt against beauty,” he said, with a wave of his hand.

“That is your error, Harry, believe me. You value beauty far too much.”

“How can you say that? I admit that I think that it is better to be beautiful than to be good. But on the other hand, no one is more ready than I am to acknowledge that it is better to be good than to be ugly.”

“Ugliness is one of the seven deadly sins, then?” cried the duchess. “What becomes of your simile about the orchid?”

“Ugliness is one of the seven deadly virtues, Gladys. You, as a good Tory, must not underrate them. Beer, the Bible, and the seven deadly virtues have made our England what she is.”

“You don’t like your country, then?” she asked.

“I live in it.”

“That you may censure it the better.”

“Would you have me take the verdict of Europe on it?” he inquired.

“What do they say of us?”

“That Tartuffe has emigrated to England and opened a shop.”

“Is that yours, Harry?”

“I give it to you.”

“I could not use it. It is too true.”

“You need not be afraid. Our countrymen never recognize a description.”

“They are practical.”

“They are more cunning than practical. When they make up their ledger, they balance stupidity by wealth, and vice by hypocrisy.”

“Still, we have done great things.”

“Great things have been thrust on us, Gladys.”

“We have carried their burden.”

“Only as far as the Stock Exchange.”

She shook her head. “I believe in the race,” she cried.

“It represents the survival of the pushing.”

“It has development.”

“Decay fascinates me more.”

“What of art?” she asked.

“It is a malady.”

“Love?”

“An illusion.”

“Religion?”

“The fashionable substitute for belief.”

“You are a sceptic.”

“Never! Scepticism is the beginning of faith.”

“What are you?”

“To define is to limit.”

“Give me a clue.”

“Threads snap. You would lose your way in the labyrinth.”

“You bewilder me. Let us talk of some one else.”

“Our host is a delightful topic. Years ago he was christened Prince Charming.”

“Ah! don’t remind me of that,” cried Dorian Gray.

“Our host is rather horrid this evening,” answered the duchess, colouring. “I believe he thinks that Monmouth married me on purely scientific principles as the best specimen he could find of a modern butterfly.”

“Well, I hope he won’t stick pins into you, Duchess,” laughed Dorian.

“Oh! my maid does that already, Mr. Gray, when she is annoyed with me.”

“And what does she get annoyed with you about, Duchess?”

“For the most trivial things, Mr. Gray, I assure you. Usually because I come in at ten minutes to nine and tell her that I must be dressed by half-past eight.”

“How unreasonable of her! You should give her warning.”

“I daren’t, Mr. Gray. Why, she invents hats for me. You remember the one I wore at Lady Hilstone’s garden-party? You don’t, but it is nice of you to pretend that you do. Well, she made it out of nothing. All good hats are made out of nothing.”

“Like all good reputations, Gladys,” interrupted Lord Henry. “Every effect that one produces gives one an enemy. To be popular one must be a mediocrity.”

“Not with women,” said the duchess, shaking her head; “and women rule the world. I assure you we can’t bear mediocrities. We women, as some one says, love with our ears, just as you men love with your eyes, if you ever love at all.”

“It seems to me that we never do anything else,” murmured Dorian.

“Ah! then, you never really love, Mr. Gray,” answered the duchess with mock sadness.

“My dear Gladys!” cried Lord Henry. “How can you say that? Romance lives by repetition, and repetition converts an appetite into an art. Besides, each time that one loves is the only time one has ever loved. Difference of object does not alter singleness of passion. It merely intensifies it. We can have in life but one great experience at best, and the secret of life is to reproduce that experience as often as possible.”

“Even when one has been wounded by it, Harry?” asked the duchess after a pause.

“Especially when one has been wounded by it,” answered Lord Henry.

The duchess turned and looked at Dorian Gray with a curious expression in her eyes. “What do you say to that, Mr. Gray?” she inquired.

Dorian hesitated for a moment. Then he threw his head back and laughed. “I always agree with Harry, Duchess.”

“Even when he is wrong?”

“Harry is never wrong, Duchess.”

“And does his philosophy make you happy?”

“I have never searched for happiness. Who wants happiness? I have searched for pleasure.”

“And found it, Mr. Gray?”

“Often. Too often.”

The duchess sighed. “I am searching for peace,” she said, “and if I don’t go and dress, I shall have none this evening.”

“Let me get you some orchids, Duchess,” cried Dorian, starting to his feet and walking down the conservatory.

“You are flirting disgracefully with him,” said Lord Henry to his cousin. “You had better take care. He is very fascinating.”

“If he were not, there would be no battle.”

“Greek meets Greek, then?”

“I am on the side of the Trojans. They fought for a woman.”

“They were defeated.”

“There are worse things than capture,” she answered.

“You gallop with a loose rein.”

“Pace gives life,” was the riposte.

“I shall write it in my diary to-night.”

“What?”

“That a burnt child loves the fire.”

“I am not even singed. My wings are untouched.”

“You use them for everything, except flight.”

“Courage has passed from men to women. It is a new experience for us.”

“You have a rival.”

“Who?”

He laughed. “Lady Narborough,” he whispered. “She perfectly adores him.”

“You fill me with apprehension. The appeal to antiquity is fatal to us who are romanticists.”

“Romanticists! You have all the methods of science.”

“Men have educated us.”

“But not explained you.”

“Describe us as a sex,” was her challenge.

“Sphinxes without secrets.”

She looked at him, smiling. “How long Mr. Gray is!” she said. “Let us go and help him. I have not yet told him the colour of my frock.”

“Ah! you must suit your frock to his flowers, Gladys.”

“That would be a premature surrender.”

“Romantic art begins with its climax.”

“I must keep an opportunity for retreat.”

“In the Parthian manner?”

“They found safety in the desert. I could not do that.”

“Women are not always allowed a choice,” he answered, but hardly had he finished the sentence before from the far end of the conservatory came a stifled groan, followed by the dull sound of a heavy fall. Everybody started up. The duchess stood motionless in horror. And with fear in his eyes, Lord Henry rushed through the flapping palms to find Dorian Gray lying face downwards on the tiled floor in a deathlike swoon.

He was carried at once into the blue drawing-room and laid upon one of the sofas. After a short time, he came to himself and looked round with a dazed expression.

“What has happened?” he asked. “Oh! I remember. Am I safe here, Harry?” He began to tremble.

“My dear Dorian,” answered Lord Henry, “you merely fainted. That was all. You must have overtired yourself. You had better not come down to dinner. I will take your place.”

“No, I will come down,” he said, struggling to his feet. “I would rather come down. I must not be alone.”

He went to his room and dressed. There was a wild recklessness of gaiety in his manner as he sat at table, but now and then a thrill of terror ran through him when he remembered that, pressed against the window of the conservatory, like a white handkerchief, he had seen the face of James Vane watching him.
The next day he did not leave the house, and, indeed, spent most of the time in his own room, sick with a wild terror of dying, and yet indifferent to life itself. The consciousness of being hunted, snared, tracked down, had begun to dominate him. If the tapestry did but tremble in the wind, he shook. The dead leaves that were blown against the leaded panes seemed to him like his own wasted resolutions and wild regrets. When he closed his eyes, he saw again the sailor’s face peering through the mist-stained glass, and horror seemed once more to lay its hand upon his heart.

But perhaps it had been only his fancy that had called vengeance out of the night and set the hideous shapes of punishment before him. Actual life was chaos, but there was something terribly logical in the imagination. It was the imagination that set remorse to dog the feet of sin. It was the imagination that made each crime bear its misshapen brood. In the common world of fact the wicked were not punished, nor the good rewarded. Success was given to the strong, failure thrust upon the weak. That was all. Besides, had any stranger been prowling round the house, he would have been seen by the servants or the keepers. Had any foot-marks been found on the flower-beds, the gardeners would have reported it. Yes, it had been merely fancy. Sibyl Vane’s brother had not come back to kill him. He had sailed away in his ship to founder in some winter sea. From him, at any rate, he was safe. Why, the man did not know who he was, could not know who he was. The mask of youth had saved him.

And yet if it had been merely an illusion, how terrible it was to think that conscience could raise such fearful phantoms, and give them visible form, and make them move before one! What sort of life would his be if, day and night, shadows of his crime were to peer at him from silent corners, to mock him from secret places, to whisper in his ear as he sat at the feast, to wake him with icy fingers as he lay asleep! As the thought crept through his brain, he grew pale with terror, and the air seemed to him to have become suddenly colder. Oh! in what a wild hour of madness he had killed his friend! How ghastly the mere memory of the scene! He saw it all again. Each hideous detail came back to him with added horror. Out of the black cave of time, terrible and swathed in scarlet, rose the image of his sin. When Lord Henry came in at six o’clock, he found him crying as one whose heart will break.

It was not till the third day that he ventured to go out. There was something in the clear, pine-scented air of that winter morning that seemed to bring him back his joyousness and his ardour for life. But it was not merely the physical conditions of environment that had caused the change. His own nature had revolted against the excess of anguish that had sought to maim and mar the perfection of its calm. With subtle and finely wrought temperaments it is always so. Their strong passions must either bruise or bend. They either slay the man, or themselves die. Shallow sorrows and shallow loves live on. The loves and sorrows that are great are destroyed by their own plenitude. Besides, he had convinced himself that he had been the victim of a terror-stricken imagination, and looked back now on his fears with something of pity and not a little of contempt.

After breakfast, he walked with the duchess for an hour in the garden and then drove across the park to join the shooting-party. The crisp frost lay like salt upon the grass. The sky was an inverted cup of blue metal. A thin film of ice bordered the flat, reed-grown lake.

At the corner of the pine-wood he caught sight of Sir Geoffrey Clouston, the duchess’s brother, jerking two spent cartridges out of his gun. He jumped from the cart, and having told the groom to take the mare home, made his way towards his guest through the withered bracken and rough undergrowth.

“Have you had good sport, Geoffrey?” he asked.

“Not very good, Dorian. I think most of the birds have gone to the open. I dare say it will be better after lunch, when we get to new ground.”

Dorian strolled along by his side. The keen aromatic air, the brown and red lights that glimmered in the wood, the hoarse cries of the beaters ringing out from time to time, and the sharp snaps of the guns that followed, fascinated him and filled him with a sense of delightful freedom. He was dominated by the carelessness of happiness, by the high indifference of joy.

Suddenly from a lumpy tussock of old grass some twenty yards in front of them, with black-tipped ears erect and long hinder limbs throwing it forward, started a hare. It bolted for a thicket of alders. Sir Geoffrey put his gun to his shoulder, but there was something in the animal’s grace of movement that strangely charmed Dorian Gray, and he cried out at once, “Don’t shoot it, Geoffrey. Let it live.”

“What nonsense, Dorian!” laughed his companion, and as the hare bounded into the thicket, he fired. There were two cries heard, the cry of a hare in pain, which is dreadful, the cry of a man in agony, which is worse.

“Good heavens! I have hit a beater!” exclaimed Sir Geoffrey. “What an ass the man was to get in front of the guns! Stop shooting there!” he called out at the top of his voice. “A man is hurt.”

The head-keeper came running up with a stick in his hand.

“Where, sir? Where is he?” he shouted. At the same time, the firing ceased along the line.

“Here,” answered Sir Geoffrey angrily, hurrying towards the thicket. “Why on earth don’t you keep your men back? Spoiled my shooting for the day.”

Dorian watched them as they plunged into the alder-clump, brushing the lithe swinging branches aside. In a few moments they emerged, dragging a body after them into the sunlight. He turned away in horror. It seemed to him that misfortune followed wherever he went. He heard Sir Geoffrey ask if the man was really dead, and the affirmative answer of the keeper. The wood seemed to him to have become suddenly alive with faces. There was the trampling of myriad feet and the low buzz of voices. A great copper-breasted pheasant came beating through the boughs overhead.

After a few moments—that were to him, in his perturbed state, like endless hours of pain—he felt a hand laid on his shoulder. He started and looked round.

“Dorian,” said Lord Henry, “I had better tell them that the shooting is stopped for to-day. It would not look well to go on.”

“I wish it were stopped for ever, Harry,” he answered bitterly. “The whole thing is hideous and cruel. Is the man ...?”

He could not finish the sentence.

“I am afraid so,” rejoined Lord Henry. “He got the whole charge of shot in his chest. He must have died almost instantaneously. Come; let us go home.”

They walked side by side in the direction of the avenue for nearly fifty yards without speaking. Then Dorian looked at Lord Henry and said, with a heavy sigh, “It is a bad omen, Harry, a very bad omen.”

“What is?” asked Lord Henry. “Oh! this accident, I suppose. My dear fellow, it can’t be helped. It was the man’s own fault. Why did he get in front of the guns? Besides, it is nothing to us. It is rather awkward for Geoffrey, of course. It does not do to pepper beaters. It makes people think that one is a wild shot. And Geoffrey is not; he shoots very straight. But there is no use talking about the matter.”

Dorian shook his head. “It is a bad omen, Harry. I feel as if something horrible were going to happen to some of us. To myself, perhaps,” he added, passing his hand over his eyes, with a gesture of pain.

The elder man laughed. “The only horrible thing in the world is ennui, Dorian. That is the one sin for which there is no forgiveness. But we are not likely to suffer from it unless these fellows keep chattering about this thing at dinner. I must tell them that the subject is to be tabooed. As for omens, there is no such thing as an omen. Destiny does not send us heralds. She is too wise or too cruel for that. Besides, what on earth could happen to you, Dorian? You have everything in the world that a man can want. There is no one who would not be delighted to change places with you.”

“There is no one with whom I would not change places, Harry. Don’t laugh like that. I am telling you the truth. The wretched peasant who has just died is better off than I am. I have no terror of death. It is the coming of death that terrifies me. Its monstrous wings seem to wheel in the leaden air around me. Good heavens! don’t you see a man moving behind the trees there, watching me, waiting for me?”

Lord Henry looked in the direction in which the trembling gloved hand was pointing. “Yes,” he said, smiling, “I see the gardener waiting for you. I suppose he wants to ask you what flowers you wish to have on the table to-night. How absurdly nervous you are, my dear fellow! You must come and see my doctor, when we get back to town.”

Dorian heaved a sigh of relief as he saw the gardener approaching. The man touched his hat, glanced for a moment at Lord Henry in a hesitating manner, and then produced a letter, which he handed to his master. “Her Grace told me to wait for an answer,” he murmured.

Dorian put the letter into his pocket. “Tell her Grace that I am coming in,” he said, coldly. The man turned round and went rapidly in the direction of the house.

“How fond women are of doing dangerous things!” laughed Lord Henry. “It is one of the qualities in them that I admire most. A woman will flirt with anybody in the world as long as other people are looking on.”

“How fond you are of saying dangerous things, Harry! In the present instance, you are quite astray. I like the duchess very much, but I don’t love her.”

“And the duchess loves you very much, but she likes you less, so you are excellently matched.”

“You are talking scandal, Harry, and there is never any basis for scandal.”

“The basis of every scandal is an immoral certainty,” said Lord Henry, lighting a cigarette.

“You would sacrifice anybody, Harry, for the sake of an epigram.”

“The world goes to the altar of its own accord,” was the answer.

“I wish I could love,” cried Dorian Gray with a deep note of pathos in his voice. “But I seem to have lost the passion and forgotten the desire. I am too much concentrated on myself. My own personality has become a burden to me. I want to escape, to go away, to forget. It was silly of me to come down here at all. I think I shall send a wire to Harvey to have the yacht got ready. On a yacht one is safe.”

“Safe from what, Dorian? You are in some trouble. Why not tell me what it is? You know I would help you.”

“I can’t tell you, Harry,” he answered sadly. “And I dare say it is only a fancy of mine. This unfortunate accident has upset me. I have a horrible presentiment that something of the kind may happen to me.”

“What nonsense!”

“I hope it is, but I can’t help feeling it. Ah! here is the duchess, looking like Artemis in a tailor-made gown. You see we have come back, Duchess.”

“I have heard all about it, Mr. Gray,” she answered. “Poor Geoffrey is terribly upset. And it seems that you asked him not to shoot the hare. How curious!”

“Yes, it was very curious. I don’t know what made me say it. Some whim, I suppose. It looked the loveliest of little live things. But I am sorry they told you about the man. It is a hideous subject.”

“It is an annoying subject,” broke in Lord Henry. “It has no psychological value at all. Now if Geoffrey had done the thing on purpose, how interesting he would be! I should like to know some one who had committed a real murder.”

“How horrid of you, Harry!” cried the duchess. “Isn’t it, Mr. Gray? Harry, Mr. Gray is ill again. He is going to faint.”

Dorian drew himself up with an effort and smiled. “It is nothing, Duchess,” he murmured; “my nerves are dreadfully out of order. That is all. I am afraid I walked too far this morning. I didn’t hear what Harry said. Was it very bad? You must tell me some other time. I think I must go and lie down. You will excuse me, won’t you?”

They had reached the great flight of steps that led from the conservatory on to the terrace. As the glass door closed behind Dorian, Lord Henry turned and looked at the duchess with his slumberous eyes. “Are you very much in love with him?” he asked.

She did not answer for some time, but stood gazing at the landscape. “I wish I knew,” she said at last.

He shook his head. “Knowledge would be fatal. It is the uncertainty that charms one. A mist makes things wonderful.”

“One may lose one’s way.”

“All ways end at the same point, my dear Gladys.”

“What is that?”

“Disillusion.”

“It was my début in life,” she sighed.

“It came to you crowned.”

“I am tired of strawberry leaves.”

“They become you.”

“Only in public.”

“You would miss them,” said Lord Henry.

“I will not part with a petal.”

“Monmouth has ears.”

“Old age is dull of hearing.”

“Has he never been jealous?”

“I wish he had been.”

He glanced about as if in search of something. “What are you looking for?” she inquired.

“The button from your foil,” he answered. “You have dropped it.”

She laughed. “I have still the mask.”

“It makes your eyes lovelier,” was his reply.

She laughed again. Her teeth showed like white seeds in a scarlet fruit.

Upstairs, in his own room, Dorian Gray was lying on a sofa, with terror in every tingling fibre of his body. Life had suddenly become too hideous a burden for him to bear. The dreadful death of the unlucky beater, shot in the thicket like a wild animal, had seemed to him to pre-figure death for himself also. He had nearly swooned at what Lord Henry had said in a chance mood of cynical jesting.

At five o’clock he rang his bell for his servant and gave him orders to pack his things for the night-express to town, and to have the brougham at the door by eight-thirty. He was determined not to sleep another night at Selby Royal. It was an ill-omened place. Death walked there in the sunlight. The grass of the forest had been spotted with blood.

Then he wrote a note to Lord Henry, telling him that he was going up to town to consult his doctor and asking him to entertain his guests in his absence. As he was putting it into the envelope, a knock came to the door, and his valet informed him that the head-keeper wished to see him. He frowned and bit his lip. “Send him in,” he muttered, after some moments’ hesitation.

As soon as the man entered, Dorian pulled his chequebook out of a drawer and spread it out before him.

“I suppose you have come about the unfortunate accident of this morning, Thornton?” he said, taking up a pen.

“Yes, sir,” answered the gamekeeper.

“Was the poor fellow married? Had he any people dependent on him?” asked Dorian, looking bored. “If so, I should not like them to be left in want, and will send them any sum of money you may think necessary.”

“We don’t know who he is, sir. That is what I took the liberty of coming to you about.”

“Don’t know who he is?” said Dorian, listlessly. “What do you mean? Wasn’t he one of your men?”

“No, sir. Never saw him before. Seems like a sailor, sir.”

The pen dropped from Dorian Gray’s hand, and he felt as if his heart had suddenly stopped beating. “A sailor?” he cried out. “Did you say a sailor?”

“Yes, sir. He looks as if he had been a sort of sailor; tattooed on both arms, and that kind of thing.”

“Was there anything found on him?” said Dorian, leaning forward and looking at the man with startled eyes. “Anything that would tell his name?”

“Some money, sir—not much, and a six-shooter. There was no name of any kind. A decent-looking man, sir, but rough-like. A sort of sailor we think.”

Dorian started to his feet. A terrible hope fluttered past him. He clutched at it madly. “Where is the body?” he exclaimed. “Quick! I must see it at once.”

“It is in an empty stable in the Home Farm, sir. The folk don’t like to have that sort of thing in their houses. They say a corpse brings bad luck.”

“The Home Farm! Go there at once and meet me. Tell one of the grooms to bring my horse round. No. Never mind. I’ll go to the stables myself. It will save time.”

In less than a quarter of an hour, Dorian Gray was galloping down the long avenue as hard as he could go. The trees seemed to sweep past him in spectral procession, and wild shadows to fling themselves across his path. Once the mare swerved at a white gate-post and nearly threw him. He lashed her across the neck with his crop. She cleft the dusky air like an arrow. The stones flew from her hoofs.

At last he reached the Home Farm. Two men were loitering in the yard. He leaped from the saddle and threw the reins to one of them. In the farthest stable a light was glimmering. Something seemed to tell him that the body was there, and he hurried to the door and put his hand upon the latch.

There he paused for a moment, feeling that he was on the brink of a discovery that would either make or mar his life. Then he thrust the door open and entered.

On a heap of sacking in the far corner was lying the dead body of a man dressed in a coarse shirt and a pair of blue trousers. A spotted handkerchief had been placed over the face. A coarse candle, stuck in a bottle, sputtered beside it.

Dorian Gray shuddered. He felt that his could not be the hand to take the handkerchief away, and called out to one of the farm-servants to come to him.

“Take that thing off the face. I wish to see it,” he said, clutching at the door-post for support.

When the farm-servant had done so, he stepped forward. A cry of joy broke from his lips. The man who had been shot in the thicket was James Vane.

He stood there for some minutes looking at the dead body. As he rode home, his eyes were full of tears, for he knew he was safe.
“There is no use your telling me that you are going to be good,” cried Lord Henry, dipping his white fingers into a red copper bowl filled with rose-water. “You are quite perfect. Pray, don’t change.”

Dorian Gray shook his head. “No, Harry, I have done too many dreadful things in my life. I am not going to do any more. I began my good actions yesterday.”

“Where were you yesterday?”

“In the country, Harry. I was staying at a little inn by myself.”

“My dear boy,” said Lord Henry, smiling, “anybody can be good in the country. There are no temptations there. That is the reason why people who live out of town are so absolutely uncivilized. Civilization is not by any means an easy thing to attain to. There are only two ways by which man can reach it. One is by being cultured, the other by being corrupt. Country people have no opportunity of being either, so they stagnate.”

“Culture and corruption,” echoed Dorian. “I have known something of both. It seems terrible to me now that they should ever be found together. For I have a new ideal, Harry. I am going to alter. I think I have altered.”

“You have not yet told me what your good action was. Or did you say you had done more than one?” asked his companion as he spilled into his plate a little crimson pyramid of seeded strawberries and, through a perforated, shell-shaped spoon, snowed white sugar upon them.

“I can tell you, Harry. It is not a story I could tell to any one else. I spared somebody. It sounds vain, but you understand what I mean. She was quite beautiful and wonderfully like Sibyl Vane. I think it was that which first attracted me to her. You remember Sibyl, don’t you? How long ago that seems! Well, Hetty was not one of our own class, of course. She was simply a girl in a village. But I really loved her. I am quite sure that I loved her. All during this wonderful May that we have been having, I used to run down and see her two or three times a week. Yesterday she met me in a little orchard. The apple-blossoms kept tumbling down on her hair, and she was laughing. We were to have gone away together this morning at dawn. Suddenly I determined to leave her as flowerlike as I had found her.”

“I should think the novelty of the emotion must have given you a thrill of real pleasure, Dorian,” interrupted Lord Henry. “But I can finish your idyll for you. You gave her good advice and broke her heart. That was the beginning of your reformation.”

“Harry, you are horrible! You mustn’t say these dreadful things. Hetty’s heart is not broken. Of course, she cried and all that. But there is no disgrace upon her. She can live, like Perdita, in her garden of mint and marigold.”

“And weep over a faithless Florizel,” said Lord Henry, laughing, as he leaned back in his chair. “My dear Dorian, you have the most curiously boyish moods. Do you think this girl will ever be really content now with any one of her own rank? I suppose she will be married some day to a rough carter or a grinning ploughman. Well, the fact of having met you, and loved you, will teach her to despise her husband, and she will be wretched. From a moral point of view, I cannot say that I think much of your great renunciation. Even as a beginning, it is poor. Besides, how do you know that Hetty isn’t floating at the present moment in some starlit mill-pond, with lovely water-lilies round her, like Ophelia?”

“I can’t bear this, Harry! You mock at everything, and then suggest the most serious tragedies. I am sorry I told you now. I don’t care what you say to me. I know I was right in acting as I did. Poor Hetty! As I rode past the farm this morning, I saw her white face at the window, like a spray of jasmine. Don’t let us talk about it any more, and don’t try to persuade me that the first good action I have done for years, the first little bit of self-sacrifice I have ever known, is really a sort of sin. I want to be better. I am going to be better. Tell me something about yourself. What is going on in town? I have not been to the club for days.”

“The people are still discussing poor Basil’s disappearance.”

“I should have thought they had got tired of that by this time,” said Dorian, pouring himself out some wine and frowning slightly.

“My dear boy, they have only been talking about it for six weeks, and the British public are really not equal to the mental strain of having more than one topic every three months. They have been very fortunate lately, however. They have had my own divorce-case and Alan Campbell’s suicide. Now they have got the mysterious disappearance of an artist. Scotland Yard still insists that the man in the grey ulster who left for Paris by the midnight train on the ninth of November was poor Basil, and the French police declare that Basil never arrived in Paris at all. I suppose in about a fortnight we shall be told that he has been seen in San Francisco. It is an odd thing, but every one who disappears is said to be seen at San Francisco. It must be a delightful city, and possess all the attractions of the next world.”

“What do you think has happened to Basil?” asked Dorian, holding up his Burgundy against the light and wondering how it was that he could discuss the matter so calmly.

“I have not the slightest idea. If Basil chooses to hide himself, it is no business of mine. If he is dead, I don’t want to think about him. Death is the only thing that ever terrifies me. I hate it.”

“Why?” said the younger man wearily.

“Because,” said Lord Henry, passing beneath his nostrils the gilt trellis of an open vinaigrette box, “one can survive everything nowadays except that. Death and vulgarity are the only two facts in the nineteenth century that one cannot explain away. Let us have our coffee in the music-room, Dorian. You must play Chopin to me. The man with whom my wife ran away played Chopin exquisitely. Poor Victoria! I was very fond of her. The house is rather lonely without her. Of course, married life is merely a habit, a bad habit. But then one regrets the loss even of one’s worst habits. Perhaps one regrets them the most. They are such an essential part of one’s personality.”

Dorian said nothing, but rose from the table, and passing into the next room, sat down to the piano and let his fingers stray across the white and black ivory of the keys. After the coffee had been brought in, he stopped, and looking over at Lord Henry, said, “Harry, did it ever occur to you that Basil was murdered?”

Lord Henry yawned. “Basil was very popular, and always wore a Waterbury watch. Why should he have been murdered? He was not clever enough to have enemies. Of course, he had a wonderful genius for painting. But a man can paint like Velasquez and yet be as dull as possible. Basil was really rather dull. He only interested me once, and that was when he told me, years ago, that he had a wild adoration for you and that you were the dominant motive of his art.”

“I was very fond of Basil,” said Dorian with a note of sadness in his voice. “But don’t people say that he was murdered?”

“Oh, some of the papers do. It does not seem to me to be at all probable. I know there are dreadful places in Paris, but Basil was not the sort of man to have gone to them. He had no curiosity. It was his chief defect.”

“What would you say, Harry, if I told you that I had murdered Basil?” said the younger man. He watched him intently after he had spoken.

“I would say, my dear fellow, that you were posing for a character that doesn’t suit you. All crime is vulgar, just as all vulgarity is crime. It is not in you, Dorian, to commit a murder. I am sorry if I hurt your vanity by saying so, but I assure you it is true. Crime belongs exclusively to the lower orders. I don’t blame them in the smallest degree. I should fancy that crime was to them what art is to us, simply a method of procuring extraordinary sensations.”

“A method of procuring sensations? Do you think, then, that a man who has once committed a murder could possibly do the same crime again? Don’t tell me that.”

“Oh! anything becomes a pleasure if one does it too often,” cried Lord Henry, laughing. “That is one of the most important secrets of life. I should fancy, however, that murder is always a mistake. One should never do anything that one cannot talk about after dinner. But let us pass from poor Basil. I wish I could believe that he had come to such a really romantic end as you suggest, but I can’t. I dare say he fell into the Seine off an omnibus and that the conductor hushed up the scandal. Yes: I should fancy that was his end. I see him lying now on his back under those dull-green waters, with the heavy barges floating over him and long weeds catching in his hair. Do you know, I don’t think he would have done much more good work. During the last ten years his painting had gone off very much.”

Dorian heaved a sigh, and Lord Henry strolled across the room and began to stroke the head of a curious Java parrot, a large, grey-plumaged bird with pink crest and tail, that was balancing itself upon a bamboo perch. As his pointed fingers touched it, it dropped the white scurf of crinkled lids over black, glasslike eyes and began to sway backwards and forwards.

“Yes,” he continued, turning round and taking his handkerchief out of his pocket; “his painting had quite gone off. It seemed to me to have lost something. It had lost an ideal. When you and he ceased to be great friends, he ceased to be a great artist. What was it separated you? I suppose he bored you. If so, he never forgave you. It’s a habit bores have. By the way, what has become of that wonderful portrait he did of you? I don’t think I have ever seen it since he finished it. Oh! I remember your telling me years ago that you had sent it down to Selby, and that it had got mislaid or stolen on the way. You never got it back? What a pity! it was really a masterpiece. I remember I wanted to buy it. I wish I had now. It belonged to Basil’s best period. Since then, his work was that curious mixture of bad painting and good intentions that always entitles a man to be called a representative British artist. Did you advertise for it? You should.”

“I forget,” said Dorian. “I suppose I did. But I never really liked it. I am sorry I sat for it. The memory of the thing is hateful to me. Why do you talk of it? It used to remind me of those curious lines in some play—Hamlet, I think—how do they run?—

“Like the painting of a sorrow,
A face without a heart.”

Yes: that is what it was like.”

Lord Henry laughed. “If a man treats life artistically, his brain is his heart,” he answered, sinking into an arm-chair.

Dorian Gray shook his head and struck some soft chords on the piano. “‘Like the painting of a sorrow,’” he repeated, “‘a face without a heart.’”

The elder man lay back and looked at him with half-closed eyes. “By the way, Dorian,” he said after a pause, “‘what does it profit a man if he gain the whole world and lose—how does the quotation run?—his own soul’?”

The music jarred, and Dorian Gray started and stared at his friend. “Why do you ask me that, Harry?”

“My dear fellow,” said Lord Henry, elevating his eyebrows in surprise, “I asked you because I thought you might be able to give me an answer. That is all. I was going through the park last Sunday, and close by the Marble Arch there stood a little crowd of shabby-looking people listening to some vulgar street-preacher. As I passed by, I heard the man yelling out that question to his audience. It struck me as being rather dramatic. London is very rich in curious effects of that kind. A wet Sunday, an uncouth Christian in a mackintosh, a ring of sickly white faces under a broken roof of dripping umbrellas, and a wonderful phrase flung into the air by shrill hysterical lips—it was really very good in its way, quite a suggestion. I thought of telling the prophet that art had a soul, but that man had not. I am afraid, however, he would not have understood me.”

“Don’t, Harry. The soul is a terrible reality. It can be bought, and sold, and bartered away. It can be poisoned, or made perfect. There is a soul in each one of us. I know it.”

“Do you feel quite sure of that, Dorian?”

“Quite sure.”

“Ah! then it must be an illusion. The things one feels absolutely certain about are never true. That is the fatality of faith, and the lesson of romance. How grave you are! Don’t be so serious. What have you or I to do with the superstitions of our age? No: we have given up our belief in the soul. Play me something. Play me a nocturne, Dorian, and, as you play, tell me, in a low voice, how you have kept your youth. You must have some secret. I am only ten years older than you are, and I am wrinkled, and worn, and yellow. You are really wonderful, Dorian. You have never looked more charming than you do to-night. You remind me of the day I saw you first. You were rather cheeky, very shy, and absolutely extraordinary. You have changed, of course, but not in appearance. I wish you would tell me your secret. To get back my youth I would do anything in the world, except take exercise, get up early, or be respectable. Youth! There is nothing like it. It’s absurd to talk of the ignorance of youth. The only people to whose opinions I listen now with any respect are people much younger than myself. They seem in front of me. Life has revealed to them her latest wonder. As for the aged, I always contradict the aged. I do it on principle. If you ask them their opinion on something that happened yesterday, they solemnly give you the opinions current in 1820, when people wore high stocks, believed in everything, and knew absolutely nothing. How lovely that thing you are playing is! I wonder, did Chopin write it at Majorca, with the sea weeping round the villa and the salt spray dashing against the panes? It is marvellously romantic. What a blessing it is that there is one art left to us that is not imitative! Don’t stop. I want music to-night. It seems to me that you are the young Apollo and that I am Marsyas listening to you. I have sorrows, Dorian, of my own, that even you know nothing of. The tragedy of old age is not that one is old, but that one is young. I am amazed sometimes at my own sincerity. Ah, Dorian, how happy you are! What an exquisite life you have had! You have drunk deeply of everything. You have crushed the grapes against your palate. Nothing has been hidden from you. And it has all been to you no more than the sound of music. It has not marred you. You are still the same.”

“I am not the same, Harry.”

“Yes, you are the same. I wonder what the rest of your life will be. Don’t spoil it by renunciations. At present you are a perfect type. Don’t make yourself incomplete. You are quite flawless now. You need not shake your head: you know you are. Besides, Dorian, don’t deceive yourself. Life is not governed by will or intention. Life is a question of nerves, and fibres, and slowly built-up cells in which thought hides itself and passion has its dreams. You may fancy yourself safe and think yourself strong. But a chance tone of colour in a room or a morning sky, a particular perfume that you had once loved and that brings subtle memories with it, a line from a forgotten poem that you had come across again, a cadence from a piece of music that you had ceased to play—I tell you, Dorian, that it is on things like these that our lives depend. Browning writes about that somewhere; but our own senses will imagine them for us. There are moments when the odour of lilas blanc passes suddenly across me, and I have to live the strangest month of my life over again. I wish I could change places with you, Dorian. The world has cried out against us both, but it has always worshipped you. It always will worship you. You are the type of what the age is searching for, and what it is afraid it has found. I am so glad that you have never done anything, never carved a statue, or painted a picture, or produced anything outside of yourself! Life has been your art. You have set yourself to music. Your days are your sonnets.”

Dorian rose up from the piano and passed his hand through his hair. “Yes, life has been exquisite,” he murmured, “but I am not going to have the same life, Harry. And you must not say these extravagant things to me. You don’t know everything about me. I think that if you did, even you would turn from me. You laugh. Don’t laugh.”

“Why have you stopped playing, Dorian? Go back and give me the nocturne over again. Look at that great, honey-coloured moon that hangs in the dusky air. She is waiting for you to charm her, and if you play she will come closer to the earth. You won’t? Let us go to the club, then. It has been a charming evening, and we must end it charmingly. There is some one at White’s who wants immensely to know you—young Lord Poole, Bournemouth’s eldest son. He has already copied your neckties, and has begged me to introduce him to you. He is quite delightful and rather reminds me of you.”

“I hope not,” said Dorian with a sad look in his eyes. “But I am tired to-night, Harry. I shan’t go to the club. It is nearly eleven, and I want to go to bed early.”

“Do stay. You have never played so well as to-night. There was something in your touch that was wonderful. It had more expression than I had ever heard from it before.”

“It is because I am going to be good,” he answered, smiling. “I am a little changed already.”

“You cannot change to me, Dorian,” said Lord Henry. “You and I will always be friends.”

“Yet you poisoned me with a book once. I should not forgive that. Harry, promise me that you will never lend that book to any one. It does harm.”

“My dear boy, you are really beginning to moralize. You will soon be going about like the converted, and the revivalist, warning people against all the sins of which you have grown tired. You are much too delightful to do that. Besides, it is no use. You and I are what we are, and will be what we will be. As for being poisoned by a book, there is no such thing as that. Art has no influence upon action. It annihilates the desire to act. It is superbly sterile. The books that the world calls immoral are books that show the world its own shame. That is all. But we won’t discuss literature. Come round to-morrow. I am going to ride at eleven. We might go together, and I will take you to lunch afterwards with Lady Branksome. She is a charming woman, and wants to consult you about some tapestries she is thinking of buying. Mind you come. Or shall we lunch with our little duchess? She says she never sees you now. Perhaps you are tired of Gladys? I thought you would be. Her clever tongue gets on one’s nerves. Well, in any case, be here at eleven.”

“Must I really come, Harry?”

“Certainly. The park is quite lovely now. I don’t think there have been such lilacs since the year I met you.”

“Very well. I shall be here at eleven,” said Dorian. “Good night, Harry.” As he reached the door, he hesitated for a moment, as if he had something more to say. Then he sighed and went out.
It was a lovely night, so warm that he threw his coat over his arm and did not even put his silk scarf round his throat. As he strolled home, smoking his cigarette, two young men in evening dress passed him. He heard one of them whisper to the other, “That is Dorian Gray.” He remembered how pleased he used to be when he was pointed out, or stared at, or talked about. He was tired of hearing his own name now. Half the charm of the little village where he had been so often lately was that no one knew who he was. He had often told the girl whom he had lured to love him that he was poor, and she had believed him. He had told her once that he was wicked, and she had laughed at him and answered that wicked people were always very old and very ugly. What a laugh she had!—just like a thrush singing. And how pretty she had been in her cotton dresses and her large hats! She knew nothing, but she had everything that he had lost.

When he reached home, he found his servant waiting up for him. He sent him to bed, and threw himself down on the sofa in the library, and began to think over some of the things that Lord Henry had said to him.

Was it really true that one could never change? He felt a wild longing for the unstained purity of his boyhood—his rose-white boyhood, as Lord Henry had once called it. He knew that he had tarnished himself, filled his mind with corruption and given horror to his fancy; that he had been an evil influence to others, and had experienced a terrible joy in being so; and that of the lives that had crossed his own, it had been the fairest and the most full of promise that he had brought to shame. But was it all irretrievable? Was there no hope for him?

Ah! in what a monstrous moment of pride and passion he had prayed that the portrait should bear the burden of his days, and he keep the unsullied splendour of eternal youth! All his failure had been due to that. Better for him that each sin of his life had brought its sure swift penalty along with it. There was purification in punishment. Not “Forgive us our sins” but “Smite us for our iniquities” should be the prayer of man to a most just God.

The curiously carved mirror that Lord Henry had given to him, so many years ago now, was standing on the table, and the white-limbed Cupids laughed round it as of old. He took it up, as he had done on that night of horror when he had first noted the change in the fatal picture, and with wild, tear-dimmed eyes looked into its polished shield. Once, some one who had terribly loved him had written to him a mad letter, ending with these idolatrous words: “The world is changed because you are made of ivory and gold. The curves of your lips rewrite history.” The phrases came back to his memory, and he repeated them over and over to himself. Then he loathed his own beauty, and flinging the mirror on the floor, crushed it into silver splinters beneath his heel. It was his beauty that had ruined him, his beauty and the youth that he had prayed for. But for those two things, his life might have been free from stain. His beauty had been to him but a mask, his youth but a mockery. What was youth at best? A green, an unripe time, a time of shallow moods, and sickly thoughts. Why had he worn its livery? Youth had spoiled him.

It was better not to think of the past. Nothing could alter that. It was of himself, and of his own future, that he had to think. James Vane was hidden in a nameless grave in Selby churchyard. Alan Campbell had shot himself one night in his laboratory, but had not revealed the secret that he had been forced to know. The excitement, such as it was, over Basil Hallward’s disappearance would soon pass away. It was already waning. He was perfectly safe there. Nor, indeed, was it the death of Basil Hallward that weighed most upon his mind. It was the living death of his own soul that troubled him. Basil had painted the portrait that had marred his life. He could not forgive him that. It was the portrait that had done everything. Basil had said things to him that were unbearable, and that he had yet borne with patience. The murder had been simply the madness of a moment. As for Alan Campbell, his suicide had been his own act. He had chosen to do it. It was nothing to him.

A new life! That was what he wanted. That was what he was waiting for. Surely he had begun it already. He had spared one innocent thing, at any rate. He would never again tempt innocence. He would be good.

As he thought of Hetty Merton, he began to wonder if the portrait in the locked room had changed. Surely it was not still so horrible as it had been? Perhaps if his life became pure, he would be able to expel every sign of evil passion from the face. Perhaps the signs of evil had already gone away. He would go and look.

He took the lamp from the table and crept upstairs. As he unbarred the door, a smile of joy flitted across his strangely young-looking face and lingered for a moment about his lips. Yes, he would be good, and the hideous thing that he had hidden away would no longer be a terror to him. He felt as if the load had been lifted from him already.

He went in quietly, locking the door behind him, as was his custom, and dragged the purple hanging from the portrait. A cry of pain and indignation broke from him. He could see no change, save that in the eyes there was a look of cunning and in the mouth the curved wrinkle of the hypocrite. The thing was still loathsome—more loathsome, if possible, than before—and the scarlet dew that spotted the hand seemed brighter, and more like blood newly spilled. Then he trembled. Had it been merely vanity that had made him do his one good deed? Or the desire for a new sensation, as Lord Henry had hinted, with his mocking laugh? Or that passion to act a part that sometimes makes us do things finer than we are ourselves? Or, perhaps, all these? And why was the red stain larger than it had been? It seemed to have crept like a horrible disease over the wrinkled fingers. There was blood on the painted feet, as though the thing had dripped—blood even on the hand that had not held the knife. Confess? Did it mean that he was to confess? To give himself up and be put to death? He laughed. He felt that the idea was monstrous. Besides, even if he did confess, who would believe him? There was no trace of the murdered man anywhere. Everything belonging to him had been destroyed. He himself had burned what had been below-stairs. The world would simply say that he was mad. They would shut him up if he persisted in his story.... Yet it was his duty to confess, to suffer public shame, and to make public atonement. There was a God who called upon men to tell their sins to earth as well as to heaven. Nothing that he could do would cleanse him till he had told his own sin. His sin? He shrugged his shoulders. The death of Basil Hallward seemed very little to him. He was thinking of Hetty Merton. For it was an unjust mirror, this mirror of his soul that he was looking at. Vanity? Curiosity? Hypocrisy? Had there been nothing more in his renunciation than that? There had been something more. At least he thought so. But who could tell? ... No. There had been nothing more. Through vanity he had spared her. In hypocrisy he had worn the mask of goodness. For curiosity’s sake he had tried the denial of self. He recognized that now.

But this murder—was it to dog him all his life? Was he always to be burdened by his past? Was he really to confess? Never. There was only one bit of evidence left against him. The picture itself—that was evidence. He would destroy it. Why had he kept it so long? Once it had given him pleasure to watch it changing and growing old. Of late he had felt no such pleasure. It had kept him awake at night. When he had been away, he had been filled with terror lest other eyes should look upon it. It had brought melancholy across his passions. Its mere memory had marred many moments of joy. It had been like conscience to him. Yes, it had been conscience. He would destroy it.

He looked round and saw the knife that had stabbed Basil Hallward. He had cleaned it many times, till there was no stain left upon it. It was bright, and glistened. As it had killed the painter, so it would kill the painter’s work, and all that that meant. It would kill the past, and when that was dead, he would be free. It would kill this monstrous soul-life, and without its hideous warnings, he would be at peace. He seized the thing, and stabbed the picture with it.

There was a cry heard, and a crash. The cry was so horrible in its agony that the frightened servants woke and crept out of their rooms. Two gentlemen, who were passing in the square below, stopped and looked up at the great house. They walked on till they met a policeman and brought him back. The man rang the bell several times, but there was no answer. Except for a light in one of the top windows, the house was all dark. After a time, he went away and stood in an adjoining portico and watched.

“Whose house is that, Constable?” asked the elder of the two gentlemen.

“Mr. Dorian Gray’s, sir,” answered the policeman.

They looked at each other, as they walked away, and sneered. One of them was Sir Henry Ashton’s uncle.

Inside, in the servants’ part of the house, the half-clad domestics were talking in low whispers to each other. Old Mrs. Leaf was crying and wringing her hands. Francis was as pale as death.

After about a quarter of an hour, he got the coachman and one of the footmen and crept upstairs. They knocked, but there was no reply. They called out. Everything was still. Finally, after vainly trying to force the door, they got on the roof and dropped down on to the balcony. The windows yielded easily—their bolts were old.

When they entered, they found hanging upon the wall a splendid portrait of their master as they had last seen him, in all the wonder of his exquisite youth and beauty. Lying on the floor was a dead man, in evening dress, with a knife in his heart. He was withered, wrinkled, and loathsome of visage. It was not till they had examined the rings that they recognized who it was.